COMMUNICATION

COMMUNITIES

CULTURES

COMPARISONS

CONNECTIONS

STANDARDS
FOR
FOREIGN
LANGUAGE
LEARNING
Preparing for the 21st Century

Language and communication are at the
heart of the human experience. The
United States must educate students who
are linguistically and culturally equipped
to communicate successfully in a plural-
istic American society and abroad. This
imperative envisions a future in which
ALL students will develop and maintain
proficiency in English and at least one
other language, modern or classical.
Children who come to school from non-
English backgrounds should also have
opportunities to develop further profi-
ciencies in their first language.

Statement of Philosophy
Standards for Foreign Language Learning

In 1993, a coalition of

four national language organi-
zations (the American
Council on the Teaching of
Foreign Languages, the
American Association of
Teachers of French, the
American Association of
Teachers of German, and
the American Association of
Teachers of Spanish and
Portuguese) received fund-
ing to develop standards
for foreign language educa-
tion, grades K-12. 

This was the seventh

and final subject area to
receive federal support to
develop national standards
as part of the Bush Admini-
stration’s America 2000
education initiative, which

continued under Goals 2000 in the Clinton Administration. An eleven-member task
force, representing a variety of languages, levels of instruction, program models, and
geographic regions, was appointed to undertake the task of defining content stan-
dards—what students should know and be able to do—in foreign language education.
At each stage of development, the task force shared its work with the broader profes-
sion and the public at large. The resulting document represents an unprecedented
consensus among educators, business leaders, government, and the community on the
definition and role of foreign language instruction in American education.

The standards do not describe the current status of foreign language education in

this country. While they reflect the best instructional practice, they do not describe
what is being attained by the majority of foreign language students. The Standards for
Foreign Language Learning will not be achieved overnight; rather, they provide a gauge
against which to measure improvement in the years to come. 

The standards are not a curriculum guide. While they suggest the types of curric-
ular experiences needed to enable students to achieve the standards, and support the
ideal of extended sequences of study that begin in the elementary grades and contin-
ue through high school and beyond, they do not describe specific course content, nor
recommended sequence of study. They must be used in conjunction with state and
local standards and curriculum frameworks to determine the best approaches and rea-
sonable expectations for the students in individual districts and schools.

The purposes and uses of foreign languages are as diverse as the
students who study them. Some students study another language in
hopes of finding a rewarding career in the international marketplace
or government service. Others are interested in the intellectual chal-
lenge and cognitive benefits that accrue to those who master multi-
ple languages. Still others seek greater understanding of other peo-
ple and other cultures. Many approach foreign language study, as
they do other courses, simply to fulfill a graduation requirement.
Regardless of the reason for study, foreign languages have some-
thing to offer everyone. It is with this philosophy in mind that the
standards task force identified five goal areas that encompass all of
these reasons: Communication, Cultures, Connections, Compari-
sons, and Communities—the five C’s of foreign language education.

Communication is at the heart of second language study,

whether the communication takes place face-to-face, in writing,
or across centuries through the reading of literature. 

Through the study of other languages, students gain a

knowledge and understanding of the cultures that use that lan-
guage and, in fact, cannot truly master the language until they
have also mastered the cultural contexts in which the language
occurs.

Learning languages provides connections to additional bod-

ies of knowledge that may be unavailable to the monolingual
English speaker. 

Through comparisons and contrasts with the language

being studied, students develop insight into the nature of lan-
guage and the concept of culture and realize that there are mul-
tiple ways of viewing the world. 

Together, these elements enable the student of languages to

participate in multilingual communities at home and around
the world in a variety of contexts and in culturally appropriate
ways. 

The Five C’s of
Foreign Language
Education

Communication

Cultures

Connections

Comparisons

Communities

“Knowing how, when, and why to say what to whom”

All the linguistic and social knowledge required for effective human-to-human inter-
action is encompassed in those ten words. Formerly, most teaching in foreign lan-
guage classrooms concentrated on the how (grammar) to say what (vocabulary).
While these components of language are indeed crucial, the current organizing princi-
ple for foreign language study is communication, which also highlights the why, the
whom, and the when. So, while grammar and vocabulary are essential tools for com-
munication, it is the acquisition of the ability to communicate in meaningful and
appropriate ways with users of other languages that is the ultimate goal of today’s for-
eign language classroom.

Standards for
Foreign
Language
Learning

Communication
Communicate in Languages
Other Than English

Standard 1.1: Students engage in conversa-
tions, provide and obtain information,
express feelings and emotions, and exchange
opinions.

Standard 1.2: Students understand and
interpret written and spoken language on
a variety of topics.

Standard 1.3: Students present informa-
tion, concepts, and ideas to an audience of
listeners or readers on a variety of topics.

Cultures
Gain Knowledge and
Understanding of Other Cultures

Standard 2.1: Students demonstrate an
understanding of the relationship between
the practices and perspectives of the cul-
ture studied.

Standard 2.2: Students demonstrate an
understanding of the relationship between
the products and perspectives of the cul-
ture studied.

Connections
Connect with Other Disciplines and
Acquire Information

Standard 3.1: Students reinforce and fur-
ther their knowledge of other disciplines
through the foreign language.

Standard 3.2: Students acquire information
and recognize the distinctive viewpoints
that are only available through the foreign
language and its cultures.

Comparisons
Develop Insight into the Nature of
Language and Culture

Standard 4.1: Students demonstrate under-
standing of the nature of language through com-
parisons of the language studied and their own.

Standard 4.2: Students demonstrate under-
standing of the concept of culture through com-
parisons of the cultures studied and their own.

Communities
Participate in Multilingual Communities
at Home & Around the World

Standard 5.1: Students use the language
both within and beyond the school setting.

Standard 5.2: Students show evidence of
becoming life-long learners by using the
language for personal enjoyment and
enrichment.

Following is an abbreviated sample of the goals, standards, and progress indicators for grades four, eight, and twelve
as they appear in “Standards for Foreign Language Learning: Preparing for the 21st Century.”

COMMUNICATION

1.1  Students engage in conversations, provide and obtain information, express feelings and emotions,

and exchange opinions.
This standard focuses on interpersonal communication, that is, direct oral or written communi-
cation between individuals who are in personal contact. In most modern languages, students
can quite quickly learn a number of phrases that will permit them to interact with each other.
In the course of their study, they will grow in their ability to converse in a culturally appropri-
ate manner. 

Sample Progress Indicators

Grade 4: Students ask and answer ques-
tions  about  such  things  as  family,  school
events,  and  celebrations  in  person  or  via
letters, e-mail, or audio and video tapes.

Grade  8:  Students  exchange  information
about personal events, memorable experi-
ences, and other school subjects with peers
and/or members of the target cultures.

Grade  12:  Students exchange, support, and
discuss their opinions and individual perspec-
tives with peers and/or speakers of the target
language  on  a  variety  of  topics  dealing  with
contemporary and historical issues.

1.2 Students understand and interpret written and spoken language on a variety of topics.

Standard 1.2 involves one-way listening and reading in which the learner works with a variety
of print and non-print materials. The context in which the language is experienced and the abil-
ity to control what they hear and read may impact students’ development of comprehension. As
a result, the ability to read may develop before the ability to comprehend rapid spoken language.
In addition, content knowledge will often affect successful comprehension, for students under-
stand more easily materials that reflect their interests or for which they have some background.

Grade 4: Students comprehend the main
idea  of  developmentally  appropriate  oral
narratives such as personal anecdotes, famil-
iar fairy tales, and other narratives based on
familiar themes.

Sample Progress Indicators

Grade 8: Students use knowledge acquired in
other settings and from other subject areas to
comprehend spoken and written messages
in the target languages.

Grade 12: Students demonstrate an increasing
understanding  of  the  cultural nuances  of
meaning in written and spoken language as
expressed by speakers and writers of the target
language in formal and informal settings.

1.3

Students present information, concepts, and ideas to an audience of listeners or readers on a variety of topics.
This standard focuses on the formal presentation of information, concepts, and ideas in spoken
and written form and is concerned, in most cases, with one-way speaking and writing. Students
with little or no previous language experience are likely to produce written and spoken lan-
guage that will contain a variety of learned patterns or will look like English with words in the
other language. This is a natural process and, over time, they begin to acquire authentic patterns
and to use appropriate styles. By contrast, home-background students will write in ways that
closely resemble the spoken language. Moreover, they will control informal oral styles. Over
time these learners will develop the ability to write and speak using more formal styles.

Sample Progress Indicators

Grade 4: Students prepare illustrated sto-
ries about activities or events in their envi-
ronment and share with an audience such
as the class.

Grade 8: Students prepare tape or video
recorded messages to share locally or with
school peers and/or members of the target
cultures on topics of personal interest.

Grade  12:  Students  prepare  a  research-
based analysis of a current event from the
perspective of both the U.S. and target cul-
tures.

CULTURES

2.1 Students demonstrate an understanding of the
relationship  between  the  practices  and  per-
spectives of the culture studied.

This  standard  focuses  on  the  practices that  are
derived from the traditional ideas and attitudes (per-
spectives) of a culture. Cultural practices refer to pat-
terns of behavior accepted by a society and deal with
aspects of culture such as rites of passage, the use of
forms  of  discourse,  the  social  “pecking  order,”  and
the use of space. In short, they represent the knowl-
edge of “what to do when and where.”

2.2 Students demonstrate an understanding of the
relationship  between  the  products  and  per-
spectives of the culture studied.

This standard focuses on the products of the culture studied
and  on  how  they  reflect  the  perspectives  of  the  culture.
Products may be tangible (e.g., a painting, a piece of literature,
a pair of chopsticks) or intangible (e.g., an oral tale, a dance, a
sacred ritual, a system of education). Whatever the form of the
product, its presence within the culture is required or justified
by the underlying beliefs and values (perspectives) of that cul-
ture, and the cultural practices involve the use of that product.

CONNECTIONS

3.1 Students reinforce  and further  their knowledge
of other disciplines through the foreign language.
Learning today is no longer restricted to a specific dis-
cipline; it has become interdisciplinary. Just as reading
cannot be limited to a particular segment of the school
day,  so  too  can  foreign  language  build  upon  the
knowledge  that  students  acquire  in  other  subject
areas. In addition, students can relate the information
studied in other subjects to their learning of the for-
eign language and culture. Foreign language instruc-
tion  thus  becomes  a  means  to  expand  and  deepen
students’  understanding  of,  and  exposure  to,  other
areas  of  knowledge.  The  new  information  and  con-
cepts presented in one class become the basis of con-
tinued learning in the foreign language classroom.

3.2 Students acquire information and recognize the
distinctive  viewpoints  that  are  only  available
through the foreign language and its cultures.

As a consequence of learning another language and
gaining  access  to  its  unique  means  of  communica-
tion, students are able to broaden the sources of infor-
mation available to them. They have a “new window
on the world.” At the early levels of language learn-
ing,  students  can  begin  to  examine  a  variety  of
sources intended for native speakers, and extract spe-
cific  information.  As  they  become  more  proficient
users of the foreign language, they can seek out mate-
rials of interest to them, analyze the content, compare
it to information available in their own language, and
assess the linguistic and cultural differences.

COMPARISONS

4.1 Students  demonstrate  understanding  of  the
nature  of  language  through  comparisons  of
the language studied and their own.

4.2 Students demonstrate understanding

of the concept of culture through comparisons
of the cultures studied and their own.

This standard focuses on the impact that learning the
linguistic elements in the new language has on stu-
dents’  ability  to  examine  English  and  to  develop
hypotheses about the structure and use of languages.
From the earliest language learning experiences, stu-
dents can compare and contrast the two languages as
different  elements  are  presented.  Activities  can  be
systematically  integrated  into  instruction  that  will
assist  students  in  gaining  understanding  and  in
developing  their  abilities  to  think  critically  about
how languages work.

As  students  expand  their  knowledge  of  cultures
through language learning, they continually discover
perspectives, practices, and products that are similar
and different from their own culture, and they devel-
op the ability to hypothesize about cultural systems in
general. Some students may make these comparisons
naturally, others may not. This standard helps focus
this reflective process for all students by encouraging
integration  of  this  process  into  instruction  from  the
earliest levels of learning.

COMMUNITIES

5.1 Students  use  the  language  both  within  and

beyond the school setting.

This standard focuses on language as a tool for com-
munication with speakers of the language through-
out  one’s  life:  in  schools,  in  the  community,  and
abroad. In schools, students share their knowledge
of  language  and  culture  with  classmates  and  with
younger  students  who  may  be  learning  the  lan-
guage. Applying what has been learned in the lan-
guage  program  as  defined  by  the  other  standards,
students come to realize the advantages inherent in
being  able  to  communicate  in  more  than  one  lan-
guage and develop an understanding of the power
of language.

5.2 Students  show  evidence  of  becoming  life-
long learners by using the language for per-
sonal enjoyment and enrichment.

Each  day  millions  of  Americans  spend  leisure  time
reading, listening to music, viewing films and televi-
sion  programs,  and  interacting  with  each  other.  By
developing a certain level of comfort with their new
language, students can use these skills to access infor-
mation  as  they  continue  to  learn  throughout  their
lives.  Students  who  study  a  language  can  use  their
skills to further enrich their personal lives by access-
ing  various  entertainment  and  information  sources
available to speakers of the language. Some students
may  have  the  opportunity  to  travel  to  communities
and countries where the language is used extensively
and,  through  this  experience,  further  develop  their
language skills and understanding of the culture.

Standards Targeted

1.1 Interpersonal Communication
1.3 Presentational Communication
2.1 Practices of Culture
3.1 Furthering Connections
5.1 School and Community
5.2 Life-long Learning

SAMPLE LEARNING SCENARIO: NEWSCAST

Description
In  the  Spanish  II  class  in  Williamston  High  School,  a  small,  rural
community in Michigan, students worked in groups to write, pro-
duce,  and  videotape  a  fifteen-to-twenty  minute  Spanish  language
news show that included news events; a live, from-the-scene report;
weather; sports; and commercials. The news events included items
from the Spanish-speaking world, the United States, the state, and
local areas.

Reflection
1.1—Students work cooperatively in groups using the language to produce the newscast.
1.3—Students produce the newscast in the language studied.
2.1—Students present news stories that reflect a perspective from the culture studied.
3.1—Students develop news items on a variety of topics.
5.1—Students use the language in the classroom.
5.2—Students develop insights necessary for media literacy.

If the students were asked to view taped newscasts and commercials from two Spanish speaking countries
and use them as models for their project, an emphasis could be placed on Standards 1.2 and 4.1 (in prepar-
ing for the project, students view newscasts and compare and contrast language styles) and Standard 4.2
(students note cultural similarities and differences in the videotapes they viewed). This type of preparation
for the project would also provide the opportunity to target Standard 2.2 with students analyzing a product
of the culture studied. This scenario could be applied to any language at a variety of levels.

700 S. Washington St., Suite 210
Alexandria, VA 22314

