BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28, 105–167
Printed in the United States of America

From monkey-like action recognition
to human language: An evolutionary
framework for neurolinguistics

Michael A. Arbib
Computer Science Department, Neuroscience Program, and USC Brain
Project, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089-2520
arbib@pollux.usc.edu

http://www-hbp.usc.edu/

Abstract: The article analyzes the neural and functional grounding of language skills as well as their emergence in hominid evolution,
hypothesizing stages leading from abilities known to exist in monkeys and apes and presumed to exist in our hominid ancestors right
through to modern spoken and signed languages. The starting point is the observation that both premotor area F5 in monkeys and Broca’s
area in humans contain a “mirror system” active for both execution and observation of manual actions, and that F5 and Broca’s area are
homologous brain regions. This grounded the mirror system hypothesis of Rizzolatti and Arbib (1998) which offers the mirror system
for grasping as a key neural “missing link” between the abilities of our nonhuman ancestors of 20 million years ago and modern human
language, with manual gestures rather than a system for vocal communication providing the initial seed for this evolutionary process.
The present article, however, goes “beyond the mirror” to offer hypotheses on evolutionary changes within and outside the mirror sys-
tems which may have occurred to equip Homo sapiens with a language-ready brain. Crucial to the early stages of this progression is the
mirror system for grasping and its extension to permit imitation. Imitation is seen as evolving via a so-called simple system such as that
found in chimpanzees (which allows imitation of complex “object-oriented” sequences but only as the result of extensive practice) to a
so-called complex system found in humans (which allows rapid imitation even of complex sequences, under appropriate conditions) which
supports pantomime. This is hypothesized to have provided the substrate for the development of protosign, a combinatorially open reper-
toire of manual gestures, which then provides the scaffolding for the emergence of protospeech (which thus owes little to nonhuman vo-
calizations), with protosign and protospeech then developing in an expanding spiral. It is argued that these stages involve biological evo-
lution of both brain and body. By contrast, it is argued that the progression from protosign and protospeech to languages with full-blown
syntax and compositional semantics was a historical phenomenon in the development of Homo sapiens, involving few if any further bio-
logical changes.

Key words: gestures; hominids; language evolution; mirror system; neurolinguistics; primates; protolanguage; sign language; speech;
vocalization

1. Action-oriented neurolinguistics and the mirror

system hypothesis

1.1. Evolving the language-ready brain
Two definitions:

1. A protolanguage is a system of utterances used by a
particular hominid species (possibly including Homo sapi-
ens) which we would recognize as a precursor to human lan-
guage (if only the data were available!), but which is not it-
self a human language in the modern sense.1

2. An infant (of any species) has a language-ready brain
if it can acquire a full human language when raised in an en-
vironment in which the language is used in interaction with
the child.

Does  the  language  readiness  of  human  brains  require
that the richness of syntax and semantics be encoded in the
genome, or is language one of those feats  – from writing
history to building cities to using computers – that played
no role in biological evolution but rested on historical de-
velopments that created societies that could develop and
transmit these skills? My hypothesis is that:

Language readiness evolved as a multimodal manual/facial/vo-
cal system with protosign (manual-based protolanguage) pro-

© 2005 Cambridge University Press

0140-525X/05 $12.50

viding the scaffolding for protospeech (vocal-based protolan-
guage) to provide “neural critical mass” to allow language to
emerge from protolanguage as a result of cultural innovations
within the history of Homo sapiens.2

The theory summarized here makes it understandable why
it is as easy for a deaf child to learn a signed language as it
is for a hearing child to learn a spoken language.

Michael Anthony Arbib was born in England, grew
up in Australia, and received his Ph.D. in Mathematics
from MIT. After five years at Stanford, he became chair-
man of Computer and Information Science at the Uni-
versity of Massachusetts, Amherst, in 1970. He moved
to the University of Southern California in 1986, where
he  is  Professor  of  Computer  Science,  Neuroscience,
Biomedical  Engineering,  Electrical  Engineering,  and
Psychology. The author or editor of 38 books, Arbib
recently  co-edited  Who  Needs  Emotions?  The  Brain
Meets the Robot (Oxford University Press) with Jean-
Marc  Fellous.  His  current  research  focuses  on  brain
mechanisms  of  visuomotor  behavior,  on  neuroinfor-
matics, and on the evolution of language.

105

Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language: An evolutionary framework for neurolinguistics

1.2. The mirror system hypothesis
Humans,  chimps  and  monkeys  share  a  general  physical
form  and  a  degree  of  manual  dexterity,  but  their  brains,
bodies,  and  behaviors  differ.  Moreover,  humans  can  and
normally  do  acquire  language,  and  monkeys  and  chimps
cannot – though chimps and bonobos can be trained to ac-
quire a form of communication that approximates the com-
plexity of the utterances of a 2-year-old human infant. The
approach  offered  here  to  the  evolution  of  brain  mecha-
nisms that support language is anchored in two observa-
tions: (1) The system of the monkey brain for visuomotor
control of hand movements for grasping has its premotor
outpost in an area called F5 which contains a set of neurons,
called mirror neurons, each of which is active not only when
the  monkey  executes  a  specific  grasp  but  also  when  the
monkey observes a human or other monkey execute a more
or less similar grasp (Rizzolatti et al. 1996a). Thus F5 in
monkey contains a mirror system for grasping which em-
ploys  a  common  neural  code  for  executed and  observed
manual actions (sect. 3.2 provides more details). (2) The re-
gion of the human brain homologous to F5 is part of Broca’s
area, traditionally thought of as a speech area but which has
been shown by brain imaging studies to be active when hu-
mans both execute and observe grasps.

These findings led to the mirror system hypothesis (Ar-
bib & Rizzolatti 1997; Rizzolatti & Arbib 1998, henceforth
R&A):

The parity requirement for language in humans  – that what
counts for the speaker must count approximately the same for
the hearer3 – is met because Broca’s area evolved atop the mir-
ror system for grasping, with its capacity to generate and rec-
ognize a set of actions.

One of the contributions of this paper will be to stress that
the F5 mirror neurons in the monkey are linked to regions
of  parietal  and  temporal  cortex,  and  then  argue  that  the
evolutionary changes that “lifted” the F5 homologue of the
common ancestor of human and monkey to yield the hu-
man  Broca’s  area  also  “lifted”  the  other  regions  to  yield
Wernicke’s area and other areas that support language in
the human brain.

Many critics have dismissed the mirror system hypothe-
sis, stating correctly that monkeys do not have language and
so the mere possession of a mirror system for grasping can-
not suffice for language. But the key phrase here is “evolved
atop”  – and Rizzolatti and Arbib (1998) discuss explicitly
how changes in the primate brain might have adapted the
use of the hands to support pantomime (intended commu-
nication) as well as praxis, and then outlined how further
evolutionary changes could support language. The hypoth-
esis provides a neurological basis for the oft-repeated claim
that  hominids  had  a  (proto)language  based  primarily  on
manual gestures before they had a (proto)language based
primarily  on  vocal  gestures  (e.g.,  Armstrong  et  al.  1995;
Hewes  1973;  Kimura  1993;  Stokoe  2001).4 It  could  be
tempting to hypothesize that certain species-specific vocal-
izations of monkeys (such as the snake and leopard calls of
vervet monkeys) provided the basis for the evolution of hu-
man speech, since both are in the vocal domain. However,
these primate vocalizations appear to be related to non-cor-
tical regions as well as the anterior cingulate cortex (see,
e.g.,  Jürgens  1997)  rather  than  F5,  the  homologue  of
Broca’s  area.  I  think  it  likely  (though  empirical  data  are
sadly lacking) that the primate cortex contains a mirror sys-

106

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

tem for such species-specific vocalizations, and that a re-
lated mirror system persists in humans, but I suggest that it
is  a  complement  to,  rather  than  an  integral  part  of,  the
speech system that includes Broca’s area in humans.

The mirror system hypothesis claims that a specific mir-
ror  system  – the  primate  mirror  system  for  grasping  –
evolved into a key component of the mechanisms that ren-
der the human brain language-ready. It is this specificity
that will allow us to explain below why language is multi-
modal, its evolution being based on the execution and ob-
servation of hand movements. There is no claim that mir-
roring or imitation is limited to primates. It is likely that an
analogue of mirror systems exists in other mammals, espe-
cially  those  with  a  rich  and  flexible  social  organization.
Moreover, the evolution of the imitation system for learn-
ing songs by male songbirds is divergent from mammalian
evolution,  but  for  the  neuroscientist  there  are  intriguing
challenges in plotting the similarities and differences in the
neural mechanisms underlying human language and bird-
song (Doupe & Kuhl 1999).5

The monkey mirror system for grasping is presumed to
allow other monkeys to understand praxic actions and use
this  understanding  as  a  basis  for  cooperation,  averting  a
threat, and so on. One might say that this is implicitly com-
municative, as a side effect of conducting an action for non-
communicative goals. Similarly, the monkey’s orofacial ges-
tures  register  emotional  state,  and  primate  vocalizations
can also communicate something of the current priorities
of the monkey, but to a first order this might be called “in-
voluntary  communication”6 – these  “devices”  evolved  to
signal certain aspects of the monkey’s current internal state
or situation either through its observable actions or through
a fixed species-specific repertoire of facial and vocal ges-
tures. I will develop the hypothesis that the mirror system
made possible (but in no sense guaranteed) the evolution
of the displacement of hand movements from praxis to ges-
tures that can be controlled “voluntarily.”

It is important to be quite clear as to what the mirror sys-

tem hypothesis does not say.

from that of the great apes:

1. It does not say that having a mirror system is equiva-
lent to having language. Monkeys have mirror systems but
do not have language, and I expect that many species have
mirror systems for varied socially relevant behaviors.

2. Having a mirror system for grasping is not in itself suf-
ficient for the copying of actions. It is one thing to recog-
nize an action using the mirror system; it is another thing to
use that representation as a basis for repeating the action.
Hence, further evolution of the brain was required for the
mirror system for grasping to become an imitation system
for grasping.

3. It does not say that language evolution can be studied

in isolation from cognitive evolution more generally.

Arbib  (2002)  modified  and  developed  the  R&A  argu-
ment to hypothesize seven stages in the evolution of lan-
guage, with imitation grounding two of the stages.7 The first
three stages are pre-hominid:

S1: Grasping.
S2: A mirror system for grasping shared with the com-

mon ancestor of human and monkey.

S3: A simple imitation system for object-directed grasp-
ing through much-repeated exposure. This is shared with
the common ancestor of human and chimpanzee.

The next three stages then distinguish the hominid line

Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language: An evolutionary framework for neurolinguistics

S4: A complex imitation system for grasping – the ability
to recognize another’s performance as a set of familiar ac-
tions and then repeat them, or to recognize that such a per-
formance  combines  novel  actions  which  can  be  approxi-
mated by variants of actions already in the repertoire.8

S5:  Protosign,  a  manual-based  communication  system,
breaking through the fixed repertoire of primate vocaliza-
tions to yield an open repertoire.

S6:  Protospeech,  resulting  from  the  ability  of  control
mechanisms evolved for protosign coming to control the vo-
cal apparatus with increasing flexibility.9

The final stage is claimed (controversially!) to involve lit-
tle if any biological evolution but instead to result from cul-
tural evolution (historical change) in Homo sapiens:

S7: Language, the change from action-object frames to
verb-argument structures to syntax and semantics; the co-
evolution of cognitive and linguistic complexity.

The  Mirror  System  Hypothesis  is  simply  the  assertion
that the mechanisms that get us to the role of Broca’s area
in language depend in a crucial way on the mechanisms es-
tablished in stage S2. The above seven stages provide just
one set of hypotheses on how this dependence may have
arisen. The task of this paper is to re-examine this progres-
sion, responding to critiques by amplifying the supporting
argument in some cases and tweaking the account in oth-
ers. I believe that the overall framework is robust, but there
are many details to be worked out and a continuing stream
of new and relevant data and modeling to be taken into ac-
count.

The claim for the crucial role of manual communication
in  language  evolution  remains  controversial.  MacNeilage
(1998; MacNeilage & Davis, in press b), for example, has
argued that language evolved directly as speech. (A com-
panion paper [Arbib 2005] details why I reject MacNeil-
age’s argument. The basic point is to distinguish the evolu-
tion of the ability to use gestures that convey meaning from
the evolution of syllabification as a way to structure vocal
gestures.)

A note to commentators: The arguments for stages S1
through  S6  can  and  should  be  evaluated  quite  indepen-

dently of the claim that the transition to language was cul-
tural rather than biological.

The  neurolinguistic  approach  offered  here  is  part  of  a
performance approach which explicitly analyzes both per-
ception and production (Fig. 1). For production, we have
much we could possibly talk about which is represented as
cognitive structures (cognitive form; schema assemblages)
from which some aspects are selected for possible expres-
sion. Further selection and transformation yields semantic
structures (hierarchical constituents expressing objects, ac-
tions and relationships) which constitute a semantic form
that is enriched by linkage to schemas for perceiving and
acting upon the world (Arbib 2003; Rolls & Arbib 2003). Fi-
nally, the ideas in the semantic form must be expressed in
words  whose  markings  and  ordering  are  expressed  in
phonological form – which may include a wide range of or-
dered  expressive  gestures,  whether  manual,  orofacial,  or
vocal. For perception, the received sentence must be in-
terpreted  semantically,  with  the  result  updating  the
“hearer’s” cognitive structures. For example, perception of
a visual scene may reveal “Who is doing what and to whom/
which” as part of a nonlinguistic action-object frame in cog-
nitive form. By contrast, the verb-argument structure is an
overt linguistic representation in semantic form – in mod-
ern human languages, generally the action is named by a
verb and the objects are named by nouns or noun phrases
(see sect. 7). A production grammar for a language is then
a specific mechanism (whether explicit or implicit) for con-
verting verb-argument structures into strings of words (and
hierarchical compounds of verb-argument structures into
complex sentences), and vice versa for perception.

In the brain there may be no single grammar serving both
production and perception, but rather, a “direct grammar”
for production and an “inverse grammar” for perception.
Jackendoff (2002) offers a competence theory with a much
closer connection with theories of processing than has been
common in generative linguistics and suggests (his sect. 9.3)
strategies for a two-way dialogue between competence and
performance  theories.  Jackendoff’s  approach  to  compe-
tence appears to be promising in this regard because it at-

Figure 1. A performance view of the production and perception of language.

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

107

Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language: An evolutionary framework for neurolinguistics

tends to the interaction of, for example, phonological, syn-
tactic, and semantic representations. There is much, too, to
be learned from a variety of approaches to cognitive gram-
mar which relates cognitive form to syntactic structure (see,
e.g., Heine 1997; Langacker 1987; 1991; Talmy 2000).

The next section provides a set of criteria for language
readiness and further criteria for what must be added to
yield language. It concludes (sect. 2.3) with an outline of the
argument as it develops in the last six sections of the paper.

2. Language, protolanguage, and language

readiness

I earlier defined a protolanguage as any system of utter-
ances which served as a precursor to human language in the
modern sense and hypothesized that the first Homo sapiens
had protolanguage and a “language-ready brain” but did not
have language.

Contra Bickerton (see Note 1), I will argue in section 7
that the prelanguage of Homo erectus and early Homo sapi-
ens was composed mainly of “unitary utterances” that sym-
bolized frequently occurring situations (in a general sense)
without being decomposable into distinct words denoting
components of the situation or their relationships. Words as
we  know  them  then  co-evolved  culturally  with  syntax
through fractionation. In this view, many ways of express-
ing relationships that we now take for granted as part of lan-
guage were the discovery of Homo sapiens; for example, ad-
jectives and the fractionation of nouns from verbs may be
“post-biological” in origin.

2.1. Criteria for language readiness
Here  are  properties  hypothesized  to  support  protolan-
guage:

LR1.  Complex  imitation:  The  ability  to  recognize  an-
other’s  performance  as  a  set  of  familiar  movements  and
then repeat them, but also to recognize that such a perfor-
mance combines novel actions that can be approximated by
(i.e., more or less crudely be imitated by) variants of actions
already in the repertoire.10

The idea is that this capacity – distinct from the simple
imitation system for object-directed grasping through much
repeated exposure which is shared with chimpanzees – is
necessary to support properties LR2 and LR3, including
the idea that symbols are potentially arbitrary rather than
innate:

LR2.  Symbolization:  The  ability  to  associate  symbols

with an open class of episodes, objects, or actions.

At first, these symbols may have been unitary utterances,
rather than words in the modern sense, and they may have
been based on manual and facial gestures rather than being
vocalized.

LR3.  Parity  (mirror  property):  What  counts  for  the
speaker (or producer) must count for the listener (or re-
ceiver).

This extends Property LR2 by ensuring that symbols can

be shared, and thus is bound up with LR4.

LR4.  Intended  communication:  Communication  is  in-
tended by the utterer to have a particular effect on the re-
cipient  rather  than  being  involuntary  or  a  side  effect  of
praxis.

The remainder are more general properties, delimiting

108

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

cognitive capabilities that underlie a number of the ideas
which eventually find their expression in language:

LR5. From hierarchical structuring to temporal order-
ing: Perceiving that objects and actions have subparts; find-
ing the appropriate timing of actions to achieve goals in re-
lation to those hierarchically structured objects.

A basic property of language – translating a hierarchical
conceptual structure into a temporally ordered structure of
actions – is in fact not unique to language but is apparent
whenever an animal takes in the nature of a visual scene and
produces  appropriate  behavior.  Animals  possess  subtle
mechanisms of action-oriented perception with no neces-
sary link to the ability to communicate about these compo-
nents and their relationships. To have such structures does
not entail the ability to communicate by using words or ar-
ticulatory gestures (whether signed or vocalized) in a way
that reflects these structures.

Hauser et al. (2002) assert that the faculty of language in
the narrow sense (FLN) includes only recursion and is the
one uniquely human component of the faculty of language.
However, the flow diagram given by Byrne (2003) shows
that the processing used by a mountain gorilla when prepar-
ing bundles of nettle leaves to eat is clearly recursive. Go-
rillas (like many other species, and not only mammals) have
the working memory to refer their next action not only to
sensory data but also to the state of execution of some cur-
rent plan. Hence, when we refer to the monkey’s grasping
and ability to recognize similar grasps in others, it is a mis-
take to treat the individual grasps in isolation – the F5 sys-
tem is part of a larger system that can direct those grasps as
part of a recursively structured plan.

Let me simply list the next two properties here, and then

expand upon them in the next section:

LR6. Beyond the here-and-now 1: The ability to recall

past events or imagine future ones.

LR7.  Paedomorphy  and  sociality:  Paedomorphy  is  the
prolonged period of infant dependency which is especially
pronounced  in  humans;  this  combines  with  social  struc-
tures for caregiving to provide the conditions for complex
social learning.

Where Deacon (1997) makes symbolization central to his
account  of  the  coevolution  of  language  and  the  human
brain,  the  present  account  will  stress  the  parity  property
LR3, since it underlies the sharing of meaning, and the ca-
pacity for complex imitation. I will also argue that only pro-
tolanguage co-evolved with the brain, and that the full de-
velopment of linguistic complexity was a cultural/historical
process that required little or no further change from the
brains of early Homo sapiens.

Later sections will place LR1 through LR7 in an evolu-
tionary context (see sect. 2.3 for a summary), showing how
the coupling of complex imitation to complex communica-
tion creates a language-ready brain.

2.2. Criteria for language
I next present four criteria for what must be added to the
brain’s capabilities for the parity, hierarchical structuring,
and temporal ordering of language readiness to yield lan-
guage. Nothing in this list rests on the medium of exchange
of  the  language,  applying  to  spoken  language,  sign  lan-
guage, or written language, for example. My claim is that a
brain that can support properties LR1 through LR7 above
can support properties LA1 through LA4 below – as long

Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language: An evolutionary framework for neurolinguistics

as its “owner” matures in a society that possesses language
in the sense so defined and nurtures the child to acquire it.
In other words, I claim that the mechanisms that make LR1
through LR7 possible are supported by the genetic encod-
ing of brain and body and the consequent space of possible
social interactions, but that the genome has no additional
structures specific to LA1 through LA4. In particular, the
genome does not have special features encoding syntax and
its linkage to a compositional semantics.11

I suggest that “true language” involves the following fur-

ther properties beyond LR1 through LR7:

is 

LA1. Symbolization and compositionality: The symbols
become words in the modern sense, interchangeable and
composable in the expression of meaning.12

LA2. Syntax, semantics and recursion: The matching of
syntactic  to  semantic  structures  coevolves  with  the  frac-
tionation of utterances, with the nesting of substructures
making some form of recursion inevitable.

the  key 

readiness, 

transition  here 

LA1 and LA2 are intertwined. Section 7 will offer candi-
dates  for  the  sorts  of  discoveries  that  may  have  led  to
progress from “unitary utterances” to more or less struc-
tured assemblages of words. Given the view (LR5) that re-
cursion of action (but not of communication) is part of lan-
guage 
the
compositionality  that  allows  cognitive  structure  to  be  re-
flected in symbolic structure (the transition from LR2 to
LA1), as when perception (not uniquely human) grounds
linguistic description (uniquely human) so that, for exam-
ple, the noun phrase (NP) describing a part of an object
may optionally form part of the NP describing the overall
object. From this point of view, recursion in language is a
corollary of the essentially recursive nature of action and
perception once symbolization becomes compositional, and
reflects addition of further detail to, for example, a descrip-
tion when needed to reduce ambiguity in communication.
The  last  two  principles  provide  the  linguistic  comple-
ments of two of the conditions for language readiness, LR6
(Beyond the here-and-now 1) and LR7 (Paedomorphy and
sociality), respectively.

LA3. Beyond the here-and-now 2: Verb tenses or other
circumlocutions express the ability to recall past events or
imagine future ones.

There are so many linguistic devices for going beyond the
here and now, and beyond the factual, that verb tenses are
mentioned to stand in for all the devices languages have de-
veloped to communicate about other “possible worlds” that
are  far  removed  from  the  immediacy  of,  say,  the  vervet
monkey’s leopard call.

If one took a human language and removed all reference
to time, one might still want to call it a language rather than
a protolanguage, even though one would agree that it was
thereby  greatly  impoverished.  Similarly,  the  number  sys-
tem of a language can be seen as a useful, but not defini-
tive, “plug-in.” LA3 nonetheless suggests that the ability to
talk about past and future is a central part of human lan-
guages as we understand them. However, all this would be
meaningless  (literally)  without  the  underlying  cognitive
machinery – the substrate for episodic memory provided by
the hippocampus (Burgess et al. 1999) and the substrate for
planning provided by frontal cortex (Passingham 1993, Ch.
10). It is not part of the mirror system hypothesis to explain
the evolution of the brain structures that support LR6; it is
an exciting challenge for work “beyond the mirror” to show
how such structures could provide the basis for humans to

discover the capacities for communication summarized in
LA3.

LA4. Learnability: To qualify as a human language, much
of the syntax and semantics of a human language must be
learnable by most human children.

I say “much of” because it is not true that children mas-
ter all the vocabulary or syntactic subtlety of a language by
5 or 7 years of age. Language acquisition is a process that
continues well into the teens as we learn more subtle syn-
tactic expressions and a greater vocabulary to which to ap-
ply them (C. Chomsky [1969] traces the changes that occur
from ages 5 to 10), allowing us to achieve a richer and richer
set of communicative and representational goals.

LR7 and LA4 link a biological condition “orthogonal” to
the mirror system hypothesis with a “supplementary” prop-
erty of human languages. This supplementary property is
that languages do not simply exist – they are acquired anew
(and may be slightly modified thereby) in each generation
(LA4). The biological property is an inherently social one
about  the  nature  of  the  relationship  between  parent  (or
other caregiver) and child (LR7) – the prolonged period of
infant dependency which is especially pronounced in hu-
mans has co-evolved with the social structures for caregiv-
ing that provide the conditions for the complex social learn-
ing that makes possible the richness of human cultures in
general and of human languages in particular (Tomasello
1999b).

2.3. The argument in perspective
The argument unfolds in the remaining six sections as fol-
lows:

Section 3. Perspectives on grasping and mirror neurons:
This section presents two models of the macaque brain. A
key point is that the functions of mirror neurons reflect the
impact of experience rather than being pre-wired.

Section 4. Imitation: This section presents the distinction
between simple and complex imitation systems for grasp-
ing,  and  argues  that  monkeys  have  neither,  that  chim-
panzees have only simple imitation, and that the capacity
for complex imitation involved hominid evolution since the
separation from our common ancestors, the great apes, in-
cluding chimpanzees.

Section 5. From imitation to protosign: This section ex-
amines the relation between symbolism, intended commu-
nication, and parity, and looks at the multiple roles of the
mirror system in supporting pantomime and then conven-
tionalized gestures that support a far greater range of in-
tended communication.

Section 6. The emergence of protospeech: This section ar-
gues that evolution did not proceed directly from monkey-
like primate vocalizations to speech but rather proceeded
from vocalization to manual gesture and back to vocaliza-
tion again.

Section 7. The inventions of languages: This section ar-
gues that the transition from action-object frames to verb-
argument structures embedded in larger sentences struc-
tured  by  syntax  and  endowed  with  a  compositional
semantics  was  the  effect  of  the  accumulation  of  a  wide
range of human discoveries that had little if any impact on
the human genome.

Section  8.  Toward  a  neurolinguistics  “beyond  the  mir-
ror”: This section extracts a framework for action-oriented
linguistics informed by our analysis of the “extended mirror

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

109

Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language: An evolutionary framework for neurolinguistics

Table 1. A comparative view of how the following sections relate the criteria LR1–LR for language readiness and LA1–LA2 for 

language (middle column) to the seven stages, S1–S7, of the extended mirror system hypothesis (right column)

Section

Criteria

Stages

2.1

3.1

3.2

4

5

6.1

7

8

LR5: From hierarchical structuring to 

This precedes the evolutionary stages charted here.

temporal ordering

LR1: Complex imitation

LR2: Symbolization
LR4: Intended communication
LR3: Parity (mirror property)

LA1: Symbolization and compositionality
LA2: Syntax, semantics, and recursion

S1: Grasping
The FARS model.
S2: Mirror system for grasping
Modeling Development of the Mirror System. This supports 

the conclusion that mirror neurons can be recruited to 
recognize and encode an expanding set of novel actions.

S3: Simple imitation
This involves properties of the mirror system 

beyond the monkey’s data.

S4: Complex imitation
This is argued to distinguish humans from other primates.
S5: Protosign
The transition of complex imitation from praxic to

communicative use involves two substages: S5a: the 
ability to engage in pantomime; S5b: the ability to make 
conventional gestures to disambiguate pantomime.

S6: Protospeech
It is argued that early protosign provided the scaffolding for 

early protospeech, after which both developed in an ex-
panding spiral until protospeech became dominant for 
most people.

S7: Language
The transition from action-object frame to verb-argument 

structure to syntax and semantics.

The evolutionary developments of the preceding sections are
restructured into synchronic form to provide a framework 
for further research in neurolinguistics relating the capa-
bilities of the human brain for language, action recogni-
tion, and imitation.

system hypothesis” presented in the previous sections. The
language-ready brain contains the evolved mirror system as
a key component but also includes many other components
that lie outside, though they interact with, the mirror sys-
tem.

Table 1 shows how these sections relate the evolutionary
stages S1 through S7, and their substages, to the above cri-
teria for language readiness and language.13

3. Perspectives on grasping and mirror neurons

Mirror neurons in F5, which are active both when the mon-
key  performs  certain  actions  and  when  the  monkey  ob-
serves them performed by others, are to be distinguished
from canonical neurons in F5, which are active when the
monkey performs certain actions but not when the monkey
observes actions performed by others. More subtly, canon-
ical neurons fire when they are presented with a graspable
object, irrespective of whether the monkey performs the
grasp or not – but clearly this must depend on the extra (in-
ferred) condition that the monkey not only sees the object
but is aware, in some sense, that it is possible to grasp it.
Were it not for the caveat, canonical neurons would also fire

110

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

when the monkey observed the object being grasped by an-
other.

The  “classic”  mirror  system  hypothesis  (sect.  1.2)  em-
phasizes the grasp-related neurons of the monkey premo-
tor area F5 and the homology of this region with human
Broca’s area. However, Broca’s area is part of a larger sys-
tem supporting language, and so we need to enrich the mir-
ror system hypothesis by seeing how the mirror system for
grasping in monkey includes a variety of brain regions in ad-
dition to F5. I show this by presenting data and models that
locate the canonical system of F5 in a systems perspective
(the FARS model of sect. 3.1) and then place the mirror
system of F5 in a system perspective (the MNS model of
sect. 3.2).

3.1. The FARS model

Given our concern with hand use and language, it is strik-
ing that the ability to use the size of an object to preshape
the hand while grasping it can be dissociated by brain le-
sions from the ability to consciously recognize and describe
that  size.  Goodale  et  al.  (1991)  studied  a  patient  (D.F.)
whose cortical damage allowed signals to flow from primary

Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language: An evolutionary framework for neurolinguistics

visual cortex (V1) towards posterior parietal cortex (PP) but
not from V1 to inferotemporal cortex (IT). When asked to
indicate the width of a single block by means of her index
finger  and  thumb,  D.F.’s  finger  separation  bore  no  rela-
tionship to the dimensions of the object and showed con-
siderable trial-to-trial variability. Yet when she was asked
simply to reach out and pick up the block, the peak aper-
ture (well before contact with the object) between her in-
dex  finger  and  thumb  changed  systematically  with  the
width of the object, as in normal controls. A similar disso-
ciation was seen in her responses to the orientation of stim-
uli. In other words, D.F. could preshape accurately, even
though she appeared to have no conscious appreciation (ex-
pressible either verbally or in pantomime) of the visual pa-
rameters that guided the preshape. Jeannerod et al. (1994)
reported  a  study  of  impairment  of  grasping  in  a  patient
(A.T.)  with  a  bilateral  posterior  parietal  lesion  of  vascu-
lar origin that left IT and the pathway V1 r IT relatively in-
tact, but grossly impaired the pathway V1 r PP. This pa-
tient can reach without deficit toward the location of such
an object, but cannot preshape appropriately when asked to
grasp it.

A corresponding distinction in the role of these pathways
in the monkey is crucial to the FARS model (named for
Fagg,  Arbib,  Rizzolatti,  and  Sakata;  see  Fagg  &  Arbib
1998), which embeds F5 canonical neurons in a larger sys-
tem.  Taira  et  al.  (1990)  found  that  anterior  intraparietal
(AIP) cells (in the anterior intraparietal sulcus of the pari-
etal cortex) extract neural codes for affordances for grasp-
ing from the visual stream and sends these on to area F5.
Affordances (Gibson 1979) are features of the object rele-
vant to action, in this case to grasping, rather than aspects
of identifying the object’s identity. Turning to human data:
Ehrsson et al. (2003) compared the brain activity when hu-
mans attempted to lift an immovable test object held be-

tween the tips of the right index finger and thumb with the
brain activity obtained in two control tasks in which neither
the load force task nor the grip force task involved coordi-
nated grip-load forces. They found that the grip-load force
task was specifically associated with activation of a section
of the right intraparietal cortex. Culham et al. (2003) found
greater activity for grasping than for reaching in several re-
gions, including the anterior intraparietal (AIP) cortex. Al-
though  the  lateral  occipital  complex  (LOC),  a  ventral
stream area believed to play a critical role in object recog-
nition,  was  activated  by  the  objects  presented  on  both
grasping and reaching trials, there was no greater activity
for grasping compared to reaching.

The FARS model analyzes how the “canonical system,”
centered on the AIP r F5 pathway, may account for basic
phenomena of grasping. The highlights of the model are
shown in Figure 2,14 which diagrams the crucial role of IT
(inferotemporal  cortex)  and  PFC  (prefrontal  cortex)  in
modulating  F5’s  selection  of  an  affordance.  The  dorsal
stream (from V1 to parietal cortex) carries the information
needed for AIP to recognize that different parts of the ob-
ject can be grasped in different ways, thus extracting affor-
dances for the grasp system which are then passed on to F5.
The dorsal stream does not know “what” the object is; it can
only see the object as a set of possible affordances. The ven-
tral stream (from V1 to IT), by contrast, is able to recognize
what the object is. This information is passed to PFC, which
can then, on the basis of the current goals of the organism
and the recognition of the nature of the object, bias AIP to
choose the affordance appropriate to the task at hand. The
original  FARS  model  posited  connections  between  PFC
and F5. However, there is evidence (reviewed by Rizzolatti
& Luppino 2001) that these connections are very limited,
whereas rich connections exist between PFC and AIP. Riz-
zolatti and Luppino (2003) therefore suggested that FARS

Figure 2. A reconceptualization of the FARS model in which the primary influence of PFC (prefrontal cortex) on the selection of af-
fordances is on parietal cortex (AIP, anterior intraparietal sulcus) rather than premotor cortex (the hand area F5).

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

111

Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language: An evolutionary framework for neurolinguistics

be modified so that information on object semantics and
the  goals  of  the  individual  influence  AIP  rather  than  F5
neurons. I show the modified schematic in Figure 2. The
modified figure represents the way in which AIP may ac-
cept signals from areas F6 (pre-SMA), 46 (dorsolateral pre-
frontal cortex), and F2 (dorsal premotor cortex) to respond
to task constraints, working memory, and instruction stim-
uli, respectively. In other words, AIP provides cues on how
to interact with an object, leaving it to IT to categorize the
object or determine its identity.

Although the data on cell specificity in F5 and AIP em-
phasize  single  actions,  these  actions  are  normally  part  of
more complex behaviors – to take a simple example, a mon-
key who grasps a raisin will, in general, then proceed to eat
it.  Moreover,  a  particular  action  might  be  part  of  many
learned sequences, and so we do not expect the premotor
neurons  for  one  action  to  prime  a  single  possible  conse-
quent action and hence must reject “hard wiring” of the se-
quence. The generally adopted solution is to segregate the
learning of a sequence from the circuitry which encodes the
unit actions, the latter being F5 in the present study. In-
stead, another area (possibly the part of the supplementary
motor area called pre-SMA; Rizzolatti et al. 1998) has neu-
rons whose connections encode an “abstract sequence” Q1,
Q2, Q3, Q4, with sequence learning then involving learn-
ing that the activation of Q1 triggers the F5 neurons for A,
Q2 triggers B, Q3 triggers A again, and Q4 triggers C to pro-
vide encoding of the sequence A-B-A-C. Other studies sug-
gest that administration of the sequence (inhibiting extra-
neous actions, while priming imminent actions) is carried
out by the basal ganglia on the basis of its interactions with
the pre-SMA (Bischoff-Grethe et al. 2003; see Dominey et
al. 1995 for an earlier model of the possible role of the basal
ganglia in sequence learning).

3.2. Modeling development of the mirror system
The populations of canonical and mirror neurons appear to
be spatially segregated in F5 (Rizzolatti & Luppino 2001).
Both sectors receive a strong input from the secondary so-
matosensory area (SII) and parietal area PF. In addition,
canonical neurons are the selective target of area AIP. Per-
rett et al. (1990; cf. Carey et al. 1997) found that STSa, in
the rostral part of the superior temporal sulcus (STS), has
neurons which discharge when the monkey observes such
biological actions as walking, turning the head, bending the
torso, and moving the arms. Of most relevance to us is that
a few of these neurons discharged when the monkey ob-
served goal-directed hand movements, such as grasping ob-
jects (Perrett et al. 1990)  – though STSa neurons do not
seem to discharge during movement execution as distinct
from  observation.  STSa  and  F5  may  be  indirectly  con-
nected via the inferior parietal area PF (Brodmann area 7b)
(Cavada  &  Goldman-Rakic  1989;  Matelli  et  al.  1986;
Petrides & Pandya 1984; Seltzer & Pandya 1994). About
40% of the visually responsive neurons in PF are active for
observation of actions such as holding, placing, reaching,
grasping,  and  bimanual  interaction.  Moreover,  most  of
these action-observation neurons were also active during
the execution of actions similar to those for which they were
“observers,” and were therefore called PF mirror neurons
(Fogassi et al. 1998).

In summary, area F5 and area PF include an observation/
execution matching system: When the monkey observes an

112

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

action  that  resembles  one  in  its  movement  repertoire,  a
subset of the F5 and PF mirror neurons is activated which
also  discharges  when  a  similar  action  is  executed  by  the
monkey itself.

I  next  develop  the  conceptual  framework  for  thinking
about the relation between F5, AIP, and PF. Section 6.1 ex-
pands the mirror neuron database, reviewing the reports by
Kohler et al. (2002) of a subset of mirror neurons respon-
sive to sounds and by Ferrari et al. (2003) of neurons re-
sponsive to the observation of orofacial communicative ges-
tures.

Figure 3 provides a glimpse of the schemas (functions)
involved in the MNS model (Oztop & Arbib 2002) of the
monkey mirror system.15 First, we look at those elements
involved when the monkey itself reaches for an object. Ar-
eas IT and cIPS (caudal intraparietal sulcus; part of area 7)
provide visual input concerning the nature of the observed
object and the position and orientation of the object’s sur-
faces, respectively, to AIP. The job of AIP is then to extract
the affordances the object offers for grasping. The upper di-
agonal in Figure 3 corresponds to the basic pathway AIP r
F5canonical r M1  (primary  motor  cortex)  of  the  FARS
model, but Figure 3 does not include the important role of
PFC  in  action  selection.  The  lower-right  diagonal  (MIP/
LIP/VIP r F4) completes the “canonical” portion of the
MNS model, since motor cortex must instruct not only the
hand muscles how to grasp but also (via various intermedi-
aries) the arm muscles how to reach, transporting the hand
to the object. The rest of Figure 3 presents the core ele-
ments for the understanding of the mirror system. Mirror
neurons do not fire when the monkey sees the hand move-
ment or the object in isolation – it is the sight of the hand
moving appropriately to grasp or otherwise manipulate a
seen (or recently seen) object (Umiltá et al. 2001) that is re-
quired for the mirror neurons attuned to the given action
to fire. This requires schemas for the recognition of both
the shape of the hand and analysis of its motion (ascribed
in the figure to STS), and for analysis of the relation of these
hand parameters to the location and affordance of the ob-
ject (7a and 7b; we identify 7b with PF).

In the MNS model, the hand state was accordingly de-
fined as a vector whose components represented the move-
ment of the wrist relative to the location of the object and
of the hand shape relative to the affordances of the object.
Oztop and Arbib (2002) showed that an artificial neural net-
work corresponding to PF and F5mirror could be trained to
recognize  the  grasp  type  from  the  hand  state  trajectory,
with correct classification often being achieved well before
the hand reached the object. The modeling assumed that
the  neural  equivalent  of  a  grasp  being  in  the  monkey’s
repertoire  is  that  there  is  a  pattern  of  activity  in  the  F5
canonical  neurons  which  commands  that  grasp.  During
training, the output of the F5 canonical neurons, acting as
a code for the grasp being executed by the monkey at that
time, was used as the training signal for the F5 mirror neu-
rons to enable them to learn which hand-object trajectories
corresponded to the canonically encoded grasps. Moreover,
the input to the F5 mirror neurons encodes the trajectory
of the relation of parts of the hand to the object rather than
the visual appearance of the hand in the visual field. As a
result of this training, the appropriate mirror neurons come
to fire in response to viewing the appropriate trajectories
even when the trajectory is not accompanied by F5 canon-
ical firing.

Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language: An evolutionary framework for neurolinguistics

Figure 3. A schematic view of the Mirror Neuron System (MNS) model (Oztop & Arbib 2002).

This training prepares the F5 mirror neurons to respond
to hand-object relational trajectories even when the hand is
of the “other” rather than the “self,” because the hand state
is based on the movement of a hand relative to the object,
and thus only indirectly on the retinal input of seeing hand
and object which can differ greatly between observation of
self and other. What makes the modeling worthwhile is that
the trained network not only responded to hand-state tra-
jectories from the training set, but also exhibited interest-
ing responses to novel hand-object relationships. Despite
the use of a non-physiological neural network, simulations
with the model revealed a range of putative properties of
mirror neurons that suggest new neurophysiological exper-
iments. (See Oztop & Arbib [2002] for examples and de-
tailed analysis.)

Although MNS was constructed as a model of the devel-
opment of mirror neurons in the monkey, it serves equally
well as a model of the development of mirror neurons in the
human infant. A major theme for future modeling, then,
will be to clarify which aspects of human development are
generic for primates and which are specific to the human
repertoire. In any case, the MNS model makes the crucial
assumption that the grasps that the mirror system comes to
recognize  are  already  in  the  (monkey  or  human)  infant’s
repertoire. But this raises the question of how grasps en-
tered the repertoire. To simplify somewhat, the answer has
two parts: (1) Children explore their environment, and as
their initially inept arm and hand movements successfully
contact  objects,  they  learn  to  reproduce  the  successful
grasps reliably, with the repertoire being tuned through fur-
ther experience. (2) With more or less help from caregivers,
infants come to recognize certain novel actions in terms of
similarities with and differences from movements already
in their repertoires, and on this basis learn to produce some

version of these novel actions for themselves. Our Infant
Learning  to  Grasp  Model  (ILGM;  Oztop  et  al.  2004)
strongly supports the hypothesis that grasps are acquired
through experience as the infant learns how to conform the
biomechanics of its hand to the shapes of the objects it en-
counters. However, limited space precludes presentation of
this model here.

The classic papers on the mirror system for grasping in
the monkey focus on a repertoire of grasps  – such as the
precision pinch and power grasp – that seem so basic that
it  is  tempting  to  think  of  them  as  prewired.  The  crucial
point of this section on modeling is that learning models
such as ILGM and MNS, and the data they address, make
clear that mirror neurons are not restricted to recognition
of an innate set of actions but can be recruited to recognize
and encode an expanding repertoire of novel actions. I will
relate the FARS and MNS models to the development of
imitation at the end of section 4.

With this, let us turn to human data. We mentioned in
section 1.2 that Broca’s area, traditionally thought of as a
speech area, has been shown by brain imaging studies to be
active when humans both execute and observe grasps. This
was first tested by two positron emission tomography (PET)
experiments  (Grafton  et  al.  1996;  Rizzolatti  et  al.  1996)
which compared brain activation when subjects observed
the  experimenter  grasping  an  object  against  activation
when subjects simply observed the object. Grasp observa-
tion  significantly  activated  the  superior  temporal  sulcus
(STS), the inferior parietal lobule, and the inferior frontal
gyrus (area 45). All activations were in the left hemisphere.
The last area is of especial interest because areas 44 and 45
in the left hemisphere of the human constitute Broca’s area.
Such data certainly contribute to the growing body of indi-
rect evidence that there is a mirror system for grasping that

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

113

Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language: An evolutionary framework for neurolinguistics

There is not space here to analyze all the relevant dis-
tinctions  between  imitation  and  other  forms  of  learning,
but one example may clarify my view: Voelkl and Huber
(2000)  had  marmosets  observe  a  demonstrator  removing
the lids from a series of plastic canisters to obtain a meal-
worm. When subsequently allowed access to the canisters,
marmosets that observed a demonstrator using its hands to
remove  the  lids  used  only  their  hands.  In  contrast,  mar-
mosets that observed a demonstrator using its mouth also
used their mouths to remove the lids. Voelkl and Huber
(2000) suggest that this may be a case of true imitation in
marmosets, but I would argue that it is a case of stimulus
enhancement, apparent imitation resulting from directing
attention to a particular object or part of the body or envi-
ronment. This is to be distinguished from emulation (ob-
serving and attempting to reproduce results of another’s ac-
tions  without  paying  attention  to  details  of  the  other’s
behavior)  and  true  imitation which  involves  copying  a
novel, otherwise improbable action or some act that is out-
side the imitator’s prior repertoire.

links Broca’s area with regions in the inferior parietal lob-
ule and STS. We have seen that the “minimal mirror sys-
tem” for grasping in the macaque includes mirror neurons
in the parietal area PF (7b) as well as F5, and some not-
quite-mirror  neurons  in  the  region  STSa  in  the  superior
temporal sulcus. Hence, in further investigation of the mir-
ror system hypothesis it will be crucial to extend the F5 r
Broca’s area homology to examine the human homologues
of PF and STSa as well. I will return to this issue in section
7 (see Fig. 6) and briefly review some of the relevant data
from the rich and rapidly growing literature based on hu-
man brain imaging and transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS) inspired by the effort to probe the human mirror
system  and  relate  it  to  action  recognition,  imitation,  and
language.

Returning to the term “language readiness,” let me stress
that the reliable linkage of brain areas to different aspects
of language in normal speaking humans does not imply that
language per se is “genetically encoded” in these regions.
There is a neurology of writing even though writing was in-
vented only a few thousand years ago. The claim is not that
Broca’s area, Wernicke’s area, and STS are genetically pre-
programmed for language, but rather that the development
of a human child in a language community normally adapts
these brain regions to play a crucial (but not the only) role
in language performance.

4. Imitation

We have already discussed the mirror system for grasping
as something shared between macaque and human; hence
the hypothesis that this set of mechanisms was already in
place in the common ancestor of monkey and human some
20 million years ago.16 In this section we move from stage
S2, a mirror system for grasping, to stages S3, a simple im-
itation system for grasping, and S4, a complex imitation sys-
tem for grasping. I will argue that chimpanzees possess a
capability for simple imitation that monkeys lack, but that
humans have complex imitation whereas other primates do
not. The ability to copy single actions is just the first step to-
wards complex imitation, which involves parsing a complex
movement into more or less familiar pieces and then per-
forming the corresponding composite of (variations on) fa-
miliar  actions.  Arbib  and  Rizzolatti  (1997)  asserted  that
what makes a movement into an action is that it is associ-
ated with a goal, and that initiation of the movement is ac-
companied by the creation of an expectation that the goal
will be met. Hence, it is worth stressing that when I speak
of imitation here, I speak of the imitation of a movement
and its linkage to the goals it is meant to achieve. The ac-
tion may thus vary from occasion to occasion depending on
parametric variations in the goal. This is demonstrated by
Byrne’s (2003) description, noted earlier, of a mountain go-
rilla preparing bundles of nettle leaves to eat.

Visalberghi and Fragaszy (2002) review data on attempts
to observe imitation in monkeys, including their own stud-
ies of capuchin monkeys. They stress the huge difference
between the major role that imitation plays in learning by
human children, and the very limited role, if any, that imi-
tation plays in social learning in monkeys. There is little ev-
idence  for  vocal  imitation  in  monkeys  or  apes  (Hauser
1996), but it is generally accepted that chimpanzees are ca-
pable of some forms of imitation (Tomasello & Call 1997).

114

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

Myowa-Yamakoshi and Matsuzawa (1999) observed in a
laboratory setting that chimpanzees typically took 12 trials
to learn to “imitate” a behavior and in doing so paid more
attention  to  where  the  manipulated  object  was  being  di-
rected than to the actual movements of the demonstrator.
This involves the ability to learn novel actions which may
require using one or both hands to bring two objects into
relationship, or to bring an object into relationship with the
body.

Chimpanzees do use and make tools in the wild, with dif-
ferent  tool  traditions  found  in  geographically  separated
groups of chimpanzees: Boesch and Boesch (1983) have ob-
served chimpanzees in Tai National Park, Ivory Coast, us-
ing stone tools to crack nuts open, although Goodall has
never seen chimpanzees do this in the Gombe in Tanzania.
They  crack  harder-shelled  nuts  with  stone  hammers  and
stone  anvils.  The  Tai  chimpanzees  live  in  a  dense  forest
where suitable stones are hard to find. The stone anvils are
stored  in  particular  locations  to  which  the  chimpanzees
continually  return.17 The  nut-cracking  technique  is  not
mastered  until  adulthood.  Tomasello  (1999b)  comments
that, over many years of observation, Boesch observed only
two possible instances in which the mother appeared to be
actively attempting to instruct her child, and that even in
these cases it is unclear whether the mother had the goal of
helping the young chimp learn to use the tool. We may con-
trast the long and laborious process of acquiring the nut-
cracking  technique  with  the  rapidity  with  which  human
adults can acquire novel sequences, and the crucial role of
caregivers in the development of this capacity for complex
imitation. Meanwhile, reports abound of imitation in many
species, including dolphins and orangutans, and even tool
use in crows (Hunt & Gray 2002). Consequently, I accept
that the demarcation between the capability for imitation
of humans and nonhumans is problematic. Nonetheless, I
still think it is fair to claim that humans can master feats of
imitation beyond those possible for other primates.

The ability to imitate has clear adaptive advantage in al-
lowing  creatures  to  transfer  skills  to  their  offspring,  and
therefore could be selected for quite independently of any
adaptation related to the later emergence of protolanguage.
By the same token, the ability for complex imitation could
provide further selective advantage unrelated to language.
However,  complex  imitation  is  central  to  human  infants

Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language: An evolutionary framework for neurolinguistics

both in their increasing mastery of the physical and social
world  and  in  the  close  coupling  of  this  mastery  to  the 
acquisition of language (cf. Donald 1998; Arbib et al., in
press). The child must go beyond simple imitation to ac-
quire  the  phonological  repertoire,  words,  and  basic  “as-
sembly skills” of its language community, and this is one of
the ways in which brain mechanisms supporting imitation
were  crucial  to  the  emergence  of  language-ready  Homo
sapiens. If I then assume (1) that the common ancestor of
monkeys and apes had no greater imitative ability than pre-
sent-day  monkeys  (who  possess,  I  suggest,  stimulus  en-
hancement rather than simple imitation), and (2) that the
ability for simple imitation shared by chimps and humans
was also possessed by their common ancestor, but (3) that
only humans possess a talent for “complex” imitation, then
I have established a case for the hypothesis that extension
of the mirror system from recognizing single actions to be-
ing able to copy compound actions was the key innovation
in the brains of our hominid ancestors that was relevant to
language. And, more specifically, we have the hypotheses:
Stage  S3  hypothesis:  Brain  mechanisms  supporting  a
simple  imitation  system  – imitation  of  short,  novel  se-
quences of object-directed actions through repeated expo-
sure – for grasping developed in the 15-million-year evolu-
tion from the common ancestor of monkeys and apes to the
common ancestor of apes and humans; and

Stage  S4  hypothesis:  Brain  mechanisms  supporting  a
complex  imitation  system  – acquiring  (longer)  novel  se-
quences of more abstract actions in a single trial – devel-
oped in the 5-million-year evolution from the common an-
cestor of apes and humans along the hominid line that led,
in particular, to Homo sapiens.18

Now that we have introduced imitation, we can put the
models of section 3.2 in perspective by postulating the fol-
lowing stages prior to, during, and building on the devel-
opment of the mirror system for grasping in the infant:

A. The child refines a crude map (superior colliculus) to
make  unstructured  reach  and  “swipe”  movements  at  ob-
jects; the grasp reflex occasionally yields a successful grasp.
B. The child develops a set of grasps which succeed by

kinesthetic, somatosensory criteria (ILGM).

C.  AIP  develops  as  affordances  of  objects  become
learned in association with successful grasps. Grasping be-
comes visually guided; the grasp reflex disappears.

D. The (grasp) mirror neuron system develops driven by
visual stimuli relating hand and object generated by the ac-
tions (grasps) performed by the infant himself (MNS).

E. The child gains the ability to map other individual’s ac-

tions into his internal motor representation.

F. Then the child acquires the ability to imitate, creating
(internal) representations for novel actions that have been
observed and developing an action prediction capability.

I suggest that stages A through D are much the same in
monkey and human, but that stages E and F are rudimen-
tary at best in monkeys, somewhat developed in chimps,
and well-developed in human children (but not in infants).
In terms of Figure 3, we might say that if MNS were aug-
mented to have a population of mirror neurons that could
acquire population codes for observed actions not yet in the
repertoire of self-actions, then in stage E the mirror neu-
rons would provide training for the canonical neurons, re-
versing the information flow seen in the MNS model. Note
that this raises the further possibility that the human infant
may come to recognize movements that not only are not

within the repertoire but which never come to be within the
repertoire. In this case, the cumulative development of ac-
tion recognition may proceed to increase the breadth and
subtlety of the range of actions that are recognizable but
cannot be performed by children.

5. From imitation to protosign

The next posited transition, from stage S4, a complex imi-
tation system for grasping, to stage S5, protosign, a manual-
based communication system, takes us from imitation for
the sake of instrumental goals to imitation for the sake of
communication. Each stage builds on, yet is not simply re-
ducible to, the previous stage.

I argue that the combination of the abilities (S5a) to en-
gage in pantomime and (S5b) to make conventional ges-
tures  to  disambiguate  pantomime  yielded  a  brain  which
could (S5) support “protosign,” a manual-based communi-
cation system that broke through the fixed repertoire of pri-
mate vocalizations to yield an open repertoire of commu-
nicative gestures.

It is important to stress that communication is about far
more than grasping. To pantomime the flight of a bird, you
might move your hand up and down in a way that indicates
the flapping of a wing. Your pantomime uses movements of
the hand (and arm and body) to imitate movement other
than hand movements. You can pantomime an object either
by miming a typical action by or with the object, or by trac-
ing out the characteristic shape of the object.

The transition to pantomime does seem to involve a gen-
uine neurological change. Mirror neurons for grasping in
the monkey will fire only if the monkey sees both the hand
movement and the object to which it is directed (Umiltá et
al.  2001).  A  grasping  movement  that  is  not  made  in  the
presence of a suitable object, or is not directed toward that
object, will not elicit mirror neuron firing. By contrast, in
pantomime, the observer sees the movement in isolation
and infers (1) what non-hand movement is being mimicked
by the hand movement, and (2) the goal or object of the ac-
tion. This is an evolutionary change of key relevance to lan-
guage readiness. Imitation is the generic attempt to repro-
duce movements performed by another, whether to master
a skill or simply as part of a social interaction. By contrast,
pantomime is performed with the intention of getting the
observer to think of a specific action, object, or event. It is
essentially communicative in its nature. The imitator ob-
serves; the pantomimic intends to be observed.

As  Stokoe  (2001)  and  others  emphasize,  the  power  of
pantomime is that it provides open-ended communication
that works without prior instruction or convention. How-
ever (and I shall return to this issue at the end of this sec-
tion), even signs of modern signed language which resem-
ble pantomimes are conventionalized and are, thus, distinct
from pantomimes. Pantomime per se is not a form of pro-
tolanguage;  rather  it  provides  a  rich  scaffolding  for  the
emergence of protosign.

All this assumes rather than provides an explanation for
LR4, the transition from making praxic movement – for ex-
ample, those involved in the immediate satisfaction of some
appetitive or aversive goal  – to those intended by the ut-
terer to have a particular effect on the recipient. I tenta-
tively offer:

The intended communication hypothesis: The ability to

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

115

Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language: An evolutionary framework for neurolinguistics

.

imitate combines with the ability to observe the effect of
such  imitation  on  conspecifics  to  support  a  migration  of
closed species-specific gestures supported by other brain
regions  to  become  the  core  of  an  open  class  of  commu-
nicative gestures.

Darwin  (1872/1965)  observed  long  ago,  across  a  far
wider range of mammalian species than just the primates,
that the facial expressions of conspecifics provide valuable
cues to their likely reaction to certain courses of behavior (a
rich complex summarized as “emotional state”). Moreover,
the F5 region contains orofacial cells as well as manual cells.
This suggests a progression from control of emotional ex-
pression by systems that exclude F5 to the extension of F5’s
mirror capacity for orofacial as well as manual movement
(discussed  below),  via  its  posited  capacity  (achieved  by
stage S3) for simple imitation, to support the imitation of
emotional expressions. This would then provide the ability
to affect the behavior of others by, for example, appearing
angry. This would in turn provide the evolutionary oppor-
tunity to generalize the ability of F5 activity to affect the be-
havior of conspecifics from species-specific vocalizations to
a general ability to use the imitation of behavior (as distinct
from praxic behavior itself) as a means to influence others.
This in turn makes possible reciprocity by a process of back-
ward chaining where the influence is not so much on the
praxis of the other as on the exchange of information. With
this, the transition described by LR4 (intended communi-
cation) has been achieved in tandem with the achievement
and increasing sophistication of LR2 (symbolization).

A  further  critical  change  (labeled  5b  above)  emerges
from the fact that in pantomime it might be hard to distin-
guish, for example, a movement signifying “bird” from one
meaning  “flying.”  This  inability  to  adequately  convey
shades of meaning using “natural” pantomime would favor
the  invention  of  gestures  that  could  in  some  way  disam-
biguate which of their associated meanings was intended.
Note that whereas a pantomime can freely use any move-
ment  that  might  evoke  the  intended  observation  in  the
mind  of  the  observer,  a  disambiguating  gesture  must  be
conventionalized.19 This use of non-pantomimic gestures
requires extending the use of the mirror system to attend to
an  entirely  new  class  of  hand  movements.  However,  this
does not seem to require a biological change beyond that
limned above for pantomime.

As pantomime begins to use hand movements to mime
different degrees of freedom (as in miming the flying of a
bird), a dissociation begins to emerge. The mirror system
for  the  pantomime  (based  on  movements  of  face,  hand,
etc.) is now different from the recognition system for the
action that is pantomimed, and – as in the case of flying –
the action may not even be in the human action repertoire.
However, the system is still able to exploit the praxic recog-
nition system because an animal or hominid must observe
much about the environment that is relevant to its actions
but is not in its own action repertoire. Nonetheless, this dis-
sociation now underwrites the emergence of protosign – an
open system of actions that are defined only by their com-
municative  impact,  not  by  their  direct  relation  to  praxic
goals.

Protosign may lose the ability of the original pantomime
to elicit a response from someone who has not seen it be-
fore. However, the price is worth paying in that the simpli-
fied  form,  once  agreed  upon  by  the  community,  allows
more rapid communication with less neural effort. One may

116

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

see analogies in the history of Chinese characters. The char-
acter 
(san)  may  not  seem  particularly  pictorial,  but  if
(following the “etymology” of Vaccari & Vaccari 1961), we
see it as a simplification of a picture of three mountains, 
,
, then we have no trouble
via such intermediate forms as 
seeing  the  simplified  character 
as  meaning  “moun-
tain.”20 The important point here for our hypothesis is that
although such a “picture history” may provide a valuable
crutch to some learners, with sufficient practice the crutch
is thrown away, and in normal reading and writing, the link
between 
and its meaning is direct, with no need to in-
voke an intermediate representation of 

In the same way, I suggest that pantomime is a valuable
crutch for acquiring a modern sign language, but that even
signs  which  resemble  pantomimes  are  conventionalized
and  are  thus  distinct  from  pantomimes.21 Interestingly,
Emmorey (2002, Ch. 9) discusses studies of signers using
ASL which show a dissociation between the neural systems
involved  in  sign  language  and  those  involved  in  conven-
tionalized gesture and pantomime. Corina et al. (1992b) re-
ported  left-hemisphere  dominance  for  producing  ASL
signs, but no laterality effect when subjects had to produce
symbolic  gestures  (e.g.,  waving  good-bye  or  thumbs-up).
Other studies report patients with left-hemisphere damage
who  exhibited  sign  language  impairments  but  well-pre-
served conventional gesture and pantomime. Corina et al.
(1992a) described patient W.L. with damage to left-hemi-
sphere  perisylvian  regions.  W.L.  exhibited  poor  sign  lan-
guage  comprehension  and  production.  Nonetheless,  this
patient could produce stretches of pantomime and tended
to  substitute  pantomimes  for  signs,  even  when  the  pan-
tomime required more complex movement. Emmorey sees
such  data  as  providing  neurological  evidence  that  signed
languages consist of linguistic gestures and not simply elab-
orate pantomimes.

Figure 4 is based on a scheme offered by Arbib (2004) in
response to Hurford’s (2004) critique of the mirror system
hypothesis. Hurford makes the crucial point that we must
(in the spirit of Saussure) distinguish the “sign” from the
“signified.” In the figure, we distinguish the “neural repre-
sentation of the sign” (top row) from the “neural represen-
tation of the signified” (bottom row). The top row of the fig-
ure makes explicit the result of the progression within the
mirror system hypothesis of mirror systems for:

1. Grasping and manual praxic actions.
2. Pantomime of grasping and manual praxic actions.
3. Pantomime of actions outside the pantomimic’s own
behavioral repertoire (e.g., flapping the arms to mime a fly-
ing bird).

4. Conventional gestures used to formalize and disam-
biguate  pantomime  (e.g.,  to  distinguish  “bird”  from  “fly-
ing”).

5. Protosign, comprising conventionalized manual (and

related orofacial) communicative gestures.

However, I disagree with Hurford’s suggestion that there
is a mirror system for all concepts  – actions, objects, and
more  – which  links  the  perception  and  action  related  to
each concept.22 In schema theory (Arbib 1981; 2003), I dis-
tinguish  between  perceptual  schemas,  which  determine
whether a given “domain of interaction” is present in the
environment and provide parameters concerning the cur-
rent relationship of the organism with that domain, and mo-
tor schemas, which provide the control systems which can
be coordinated to effect a wide variety of actions. Recog-

Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language: An evolutionary framework for neurolinguistics

Figure 4. The bidirectional sign relation links words and con-
cepts. The top row concerns Phonological Form, which may re-
late to signed language as much as to spoken language. The bot-
tom row concerns Cognitive Form and includes the recognition of
objects and actions. Phonological Form is present only in humans
while Cognitive Form is present in both monkeys and humans.
The Mirror System Hypothesis hypothesizes that there is a mirror
system for words, but there may not be a mirror system for con-
cepts.

nizing an object (an apple, say) may be linked to many dif-
ferent courses of action (to place the apple in one’s shop-
ping basket; to place the apple in the bowl at home; to peel
the apple; to eat the apple; to discard a rotten apple, etc.).
In this list, some items are apple-specific, whereas other in-
voke generic schemas for reaching and grasping. Such con-
siderations  led  me  to  separate  perceptual  and  motor
schemas – a given action may be invoked in a wide variety
of circumstances; a given perception may, as part of a larger
assemblage, precede many courses of action. Hence, I re-
ject the notion of a mirror system for concepts. Only rarely
(as in the case of certain basic actions such as grasp or run,
or certain expressions of emotion) will the perceptual and
motor schemas be integrated into a “mirror schema.” I do
not  see  a  “concept”  as  corresponding  to  one  word,  but
rather to a graded set of activations of the schema network.
But if this is the case, does a mirror system for protosigns
(and, later, for the words and utterances of a language) re-
ally yield the LR3 form of the mirror property – that what
counts for the sender must count for the receiver? Actually,
it yields only half of this directly: the recognition that the
action of the observed protosigner is his or her version of
one of the conventional gestures in the observer’s reper-
toire. The claim, then, is that the LR3 form of the mirror
property – that which counts for the sender must count for
the receiver – does not result from the evolution of the F5
mirror  system  in  and  of  itself to  support  communicative
gestures as well as praxic actions; rather, this evolution oc-
curs within the neural context that links the execution and
observation of an action to the creature’s planning of its own
actions and interpretations of the actions of others (Fig. 5).
These linkages extract more or less coherent patterns from
the creature’s experience of the effects of its own actions as
well as the consequences of actions by others. Similarly, ex-
ecution and observation of a communicative action must be
linked  to  the  creature’s  planning  and  interpretations  of
communication with others in relation to the ongoing be-
haviors that provide the significance of the communicative
gestures involved.

Figure 5. The perceptuomotor coding for both observation and
execution contained in the mirror system for manual actions in the
monkey is linked to “conceptual systems” for interpretation and
planning of such actions. The interpretation and planning systems
themselves do not have the mirror property save through their
linkage to the actual mirror system.

6. The emergence of protospeech

6.1. The path to protospeech is indirect
My claim here is that the path to protospeech is indirect,
with early protosign providing a necessary scaffolding for
the emergence of protospeech. I thus reject the claim that
speech evolved directly as an elaboration of a closed reper-
toire of alarm calls and other species-specific vocalizations
such as exhibited by nonhuman primates. However, I claim
neither that protosign attained the status of a full language
prior to the emergence of early forms of protospeech, nor
even that stage S5 (protosign) was completed before stage
S6 (protospeech) began.

Manual gesture certainly appears to be more conducive
to iconic representation than oral gesture. The main argu-
ment of section 5 was that the use of pantomime made it
easy to acquire a core vocabulary, while the discovery of a
growing stock of conventional signs (or sign modifiers) to
mark important distinctions then created a culture in which
the use of arbitrary gestures would increasingly augment
and ritualize (without entirely supplanting) the use of pan-
tomime.23 Once an organism has an iconic gesture, it can
both modulate that gesture and/or symbolize it (non-icon-
ically) by “simply” associating a vocalization with it. Once
the association had been learned, the “scaffolding” gesture
(like the pantomime that supported its conventionalization,
or the caricature that supports the initial understanding of
some Chinese ideograms) could be dropped to leave a sym-
bol that need have no remaining iconic relation to its refer-
ent, even if the indirect associative relationship can be re-
called on some occasions. One open question is the extent
to which protosign must be in place before this scaffolding
can  effectively  support  the  development  of  protospeech.
Because there is no direct mapping of sign (with its use of
concurrency and signing space) to phoneme sequences, I
think that this development is far more of a breakthrough
than it may at first sight appear.

I have separated S6, the evolution of protospeech, from
S5, the evolution of protosign, to stress the point that the
role of F5 in grounding the evolution of a protolanguage

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

117

Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language: An evolutionary framework for neurolinguistics

system would work just as well if we and all our ancestors
had been deaf. However, primates do have a rich auditory
system which contributes to species survival in many ways,
of which communication is just one (Ghazanfar 2003). The
protolanguage perception system could thus build upon the
existing auditory mechanisms in the move to derive proto-
speech. However, it appears that considerable evolution of
the vocal-motor system was needed to yield the flexible vo-
cal  apparatus  that  distinguishes  humans  from  other  pri-
mates. MacNeilage (1998) offers an argument for how the
mechanism for producing consonant-vowel alternations en
route to a flexible repertoire of syllables might have evolved
from the cyclic mandibular alternations of eating, but offers
no clue as to what might have linked such a process to the
expression  of  meaning  (but  see  MacNeilage  &  Davis,  in
press b). This problem is discussed much further in Arbib
(2005) which spells out how protosign (S5) may have pro-
vided a scaffolding for protospeech (S6), forming an “ex-
panding spiral” wherein the two interacted with each other
in supporting the evolution of brain and body that made
Homo sapiens “language-ready” in a multi-modal integra-
tion of manual, facial and vocal actions.

New data on mirror neurons for grasping that exhibit au-
ditory responses, and on mirror-like properties of orofacial
neurons in F5, add to the subtlety of the argument. Kohler
et al. (2002) studied mirror neurons for actions which are
accompanied by characteristic sounds, and found that a sub-
set of these neurons are activated by the sound of the ac-
tion (e.g., breaking a peanut in half) as well as sight of the
action. Does this suggest that protospeech mediated by the
F5  homologue  in  the  hominid  brain  could  have  evolved
without the scaffolding provided by protosign? My answer
is negative for two reasons: (1) I have argued that imitation
is crucial to grounding pantomime in which a movement is
performed in the absence of the object for which such a
movement would constitute part of a praxic action. How-
ever, the sounds studied by Kohler et al. (2002) cannot be
created in the absence of the object, and there is no evi-
dence that monkeys can use their vocal apparatus to mimic
the sounds they have heard. I would further argue that the
limited number and congruence of these “auditory mirror
neurons” is more consistent with the view that manual ges-
ture is primary in the early stages of the evolution of lan-
guage readiness, with audiomotor neurons laying the basis
for later extension of protosign to protospeech.

Complementing  earlier  studies  on  hand  neurons  in
macaque F5, Ferrari et al. (2003) studied mouth motor neu-
rons in F5 and showed that about one-third of them also dis-
charge when the monkey observes another individual per-
forming mouth actions. The majority of these “mouth mirror
neurons” become active during the execution and observa-
tion of mouth actions related to ingestive functions such as
grasping, sucking, or breaking food. Another population of
mouth mirror neurons also discharges during the execution
of ingestive actions, but the most effective visual stimuli in
triggering  them  are  communicative  mouth  gestures  (e.g.,
lip-smacking) – one action becomes associated with a whole
performance of which one part involves similar movements.
This fits with the hypothesis that neurons learn to associate
patterns  of  neural  firing  rather  than  being  committed  to
learn specifically pigeonholed categories of data. Thus, a po-
tential mirror neuron is in no way committed to become a
mirror  neuron  in  the  strict  sense,  even  though  it  may  be
more likely to do so than otherwise. The observed commu-

118

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

nicative actions (with the effective executed action for dif-
ferent “mirror neurons” in parentheses) include lip-smack-
ing  (sucking  and  lip-smacking);  lips  protrusion  (grasping
with lips, lips protrusion, lip-smacking, grasping, and chew-
ing); tongue protrusion (reaching with tongue); teeth-chat-
ter (grasping); and lips/tongue protrusion (grasping with lips
and reaching with tongue; grasping). We therefore see that
the communicative gestures and their associated effective
observed actions are a long way from the sort of vocalizations
that occur in speech (see Fogassi & Ferrari [in press] for fur-
ther discussion).

Rizzolatti and Arbib (1998) stated that “This new use of
vocalization [in speech] necessitated its skillful control, a re-
quirement that could not be fulfilled by the ancient emo-
tional  vocalization  centers.  This  new  situation  was  most
likely the ‘cause’ of the emergence of human Broca’s area.”
I would now rather say that Homo habilis and even more so
Homo erectus had a “proto-Broca’s area” based on an F5-
like  precursor  mediating  communication  by  manual  and
orofacial gestures, which made possible a process of collat-
eralization whereby this “proto” Broca’s area gained primi-
tive control of the vocal machinery, thus yielding increased
skill and openness in vocalization, moving from the fixed
repertoire of primate vocalizations to the unlimited (open)
range of vocalizations exploited in speech. Speech appara-
tus and brain regions could then coevolve to yield the con-
figuration seen in modern Homo sapiens.

Corballis (2003b) argues that there may have been a sin-
gle-gene mutation producing a “dextral” allele, which cre-
ated a strong bias toward right-handedness and left-cere-
bral  dominance  for  language  at  some  point  in  hominid
evolution.24 He then suggests that the “speciation event”
that distinguished Homo sapiens from other large-brained
hominids  may  have  been  a  switch  from  a  predominantly
gestural to a predominantly vocal form of language. By con-
trast, I would argue that there was no one distinctive speci-
ation event, and that the process whereby communication
for most humans became predominantly vocal was not a
switch but was “cultural” and cumulative.

7. The inventions of languages

The divergence of the Romance languages from Latin took
about one thousand years. The divergence of the Indo-Eu-
ropean languages to form the immense diversity of Hindi,
German, Italian, English, and so on took about 6,000 years
(Dixon 1997). How can we imagine what has changed since
the emergence of Homo sapiens some 200,000 years ago?
Or in 5,000,000 years of prior hominid evolution? I claim
that the first Homo sapiens were language-ready but did not
have language in the modern sense. Rather, my hypothesis
is that stage S7, the transition from protolanguage to lan-
guage, is the culmination of manifold discoveries in the his-
tory of mankind:

In section 2, I asserted that in much of protolanguage, a
complete communicative act involved a unitary utterance,
the use of a single symbol formed as a sequence of gestures,
whose component gestures  – whether manual or vocal  –
had no independent meaning. Unitary utterances such as
“grooflook” or “koomzash” might have encoded quite com-
plex descriptions such as “The alpha male has killed a meat
animal and now the tribe has a chance to feast together.
Yum, yum!” or commands such as “Take your spear and go

Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language: An evolutionary framework for neurolinguistics

around the other side of that animal and we will have a bet-
ter chance together of being able to kill it.” On this view,
“protolanguage” grew by adding arbitrary novel unitary ut-
terances to convey complex but frequently important situa-
tions, and it was a major later discovery en route to language
as  we  now  understand  it  that  one  could  gain  expressive
power by fractionating such utterances into shorter utter-
ances conveying components of the scene or command (cf.
Wray 1998; 2000). Put differently, the utterances of prelan-
guage were more akin to the “calls” of modern primates –
such as the “leopard call” of the vervet monkey, which is
emitted by a monkey who has seen a leopard and which trig-
gers the appropriate escape behavior in other monkeys  –
than to sentences as defined in a language like English, but
they differed crucially from the primate calls in that new
utterances could be invented and acquired through learn-
ing within a community, rather than emerging only through
biological  evolution.  Thus,  the  set  of  such  unitary  utter-
ances was open, whereas the set of calls was closed.

The  following  hypothetical  but  instructive  example  is
similar to examples offered at greater length by Wray (1998;
2000) to suggest how the fractionation of unitary utterances
might occur (and see Kirby [2000] for a related computer
simulation): Imagine that a tribe has two unitary utterances
concerning fire which, by chance, contain similar substrings
which become regularized so that for the first time there is
a sign for “fire.” Now the two original utterances are mod-
ified by replacing the similar substrings by the new regu-
larized substring. Eventually, some tribe members regular-
ize the complementary gestures in the first string to get a
sign for “burns”; later, others regularize the complementary
gestures in the second string to get a sign for “cooks meat.”
However,  because  of  the  arbitrary  origin  of  the  sign  for
“fire,” the placement of the gestures that have come to de-
note “burns” relative to “fire” differs greatly from those for
“cooks meat” relative to “fire.” It therefore requires a fur-
ther invention to regularize the placement of the gestures
in both utterances – and in the process, words are crystal-
lized  at  the  same  time  as  the  protosyntax  that  combines
them. Clearly, such fractionation could apply to protosign
as well as to protospeech.

However, fractionation is not the only mechanism that
could produce composite structures. For example, a tribe
might over the generations develop different signs for “sour
apple,” “ripe apple,” “sour plum,” “ripe plum,” and so on,
but not have signs for “sour” and “ripe” even though the dis-
tinction  is  behaviorally  important.  Hence,  2n signs  are
needed to name n kinds of fruit. Occasionally someone will
eat a piece of sour fruit by mistake and make a characteris-
tic  face  and  intake  of  breath  when  doing  so.  Eventually,
some genius pioneers the innovation of getting a conven-
tionalized variant of this gesture accepted as the sign for
“sour” by the community, to be used as a warning before
eating the fruit, thus extending the protolanguage.25 A step
towards language is taken when another genius gets people
to use the sign for “sour” plus the sign for “ripe X” to re-
place the sign for “sour X” for each kind X of fruit. This in-
novation allows new users of the protolanguage to simplify
learning fruit names, since now only n ⫹ 1 names are re-
quired for the basic vocabulary, rather than 2n as before.
More  to  the  point,  if  a  new  fruit  is  discovered,  only  one
name need be invented rather than two. I stress that the in-
vention of “sour” is a great discovery in and of itself. It might
take hundreds of such discoveries distributed across cen-

turies or more before someone could recognize the com-
monality across all these constructions and thus invent the
precursor of what we would now call adjectives.26

The latter example is meant to indicate how a sign for
“sour” could be added to the protolanguage vocabulary with
no appeal to an underlying “adjective mechanism.” Instead,
one  would  posit  that  the  features  of  language  emerged 
by  bricolage  (tinkering)  which  added  many  features  as
“patches” to a protolanguage, with general “rules” emerg-
ing both consciously and unconsciously only as generaliza-
tions could be imposed upon, or discerned in, a population
of ad hoc mechanisms. Such generalizations amplified the
power of groups of inventions by unifying them to provide
expressive tools of greatly extended range. According to this
account, there was no sudden transition from unitary ut-
terances  to  an  elaborate  language  with  a  rich  syntax  and
compositional semantics; no point at which one could say of
a tribe “Until now they used protolanguage but henceforth
they use language.”

To proceed further, I need to distinguish two “readings”
of a case frame like Grasp(Leo, raisin), as an action-object
frame and as a verb-argument structure. I chart the transi-
tion as follows:

(1) As an action-object frame, Grasp(Leo, raisin) repre-
sents the perception that Leo is grasping a raisin. Here the
action “grasp” involves two “objects,” one the “grasper” Leo
and the other the “graspee,” the “raisin.” Clearly the mon-
key has the perceptual capability to recognize such a situa-
tion27 and enter a brain state that represents it, with that
representation  distributed  across  a  number  of  brain  re-
gions. Indeed, in introducing principle LR5 (from hierar-
chical  structuring  to  temporal  ordering)  I  noted  that  the
ability to translate a hierarchical conceptual structure into
a temporally ordered structure of actions is apparent when-
ever an animal takes in the nature of a visual scene and pro-
duces appropriate behavior. But to have such a capability
does not entail the ability to communicate in a way that re-
flects these structures. It is also crucial to note here the im-
portance of recognition not only of the action (mediated by
F5) but also of the object (mediated by IT). Indeed, Figure
2 (the FARS model) showed that the canonical activity of
F5 already exhibits a choice between the affordances of an
object (mediated by the dorsal stream) that involves the na-
ture of the object (as recognized by IT and elaborated upon
in PFC in a process of “action-oriented perception”). In the
same way, the activity of mirror neurons does not rest solely
upon the parietal recognition (in PF, Fig. 3) of the hand mo-
tion and the object’s affordances (AIP) but also on the “se-
mantics” of the object as extracted by IT. In the spirit of Fig-
ure 2, I suggest that this semantics is relayed via PFC and
thence through AIP and PF to F5 to affect there the mir-
ror neurons as well as the canonical neurons.

(2) My suggestion is that at least the immediate hominid
precursors of Homo sapiens would have been able to per-
ceive a large variety of action-object frames and, for many
of these, to form a distinctive gesture or vocalization to ap-
propriately direct the attention of another tribe member,
but that the vocalization used would be in general a unitary
utterance which need not have involved separate lexical en-
tries for the action or the objects. However, the ability to
symbolize more and more situations would have required
the  creation  of  a  “symbol  tool  kit”  of  meaningless  ele-
ments28 from which an open-ended class of symbols could
be generated.

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

119

Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language: An evolutionary framework for neurolinguistics

(3) As a verb-argument structure, Grasp(Leo, raisin) is
expressed in English in a sentence such as “Leo grasps the
raisin,” with “grasps” the verb, and “Leo” and “raisin” the
arguments. I hypothesize that stage S7 was grounded in the
development of precursors to verb-argument structure us-
ing vocalizations that were decomposable into “something
like a verb” and two somethings that would be “something
like nouns.” This is the crucial step in the transition from
protolanguage to human language as we know it. Abstract
symbols are grounded (but more and more indirectly) in ac-
tion-oriented  perception;  members  of  a  community  may
acquire the use of these new symbols (the crucial distinc-
tion here is with the fixed repertoire of primate calls) by im-
itating their use by others; and, crucially, these symbols can
be  compounded  in  novel  combinations  to  communicate
about  novel  situations  for  which  no  agreed-upon  unitary
communicative symbol exists.

Having stressed above that adjectives are not a “natural
category,”  I  hasten  to  add  that  I  do  not  regard  verbs  or
nouns as natural categories either. What I do assert is that
every human language must find a way to express the con-
tent  of  action-object  frames.  The  vast  variety  of  these
frames can yield many different forms of expression across
human  languages.  I  view  linguistic  universals  as  being
based  on  universals  of  communication  that  take  into  ac-
count the processing loads of perception and production
rather than as universals of autonomous syntax. Hence, in
emphasizing verb-argument structures in the form familiar
from English, I am opting for economy of exposition rather
than  further  illustration  of  the  diversities  of  human  lan-
guage. To continue with the bricolage theme, much of “pro-
tosyntax” would have developed at first on an ad hoc basis,
with  variations  on  a  few  basic  themes,  rather  than  being
grounded from the start in broad categories like “noun” or
“verb” with general rule-like procedures to combine them
in the phonological expression of cognitive form. It might
have  taken  many,  many  millennia  for  people  to  discover
syntax and semantics in the sense of gaining immense ex-
pressive power by “going recursive” with a relatively limited
set of strategies for compounding and marking utterances.
As a language emerged, it would come to include mecha-
nisms to express kinship structures and technologies of the
tribes, and these cultural products would themselves be ex-
panded by the increased effectiveness of transmission from
generation  to  generation  that  the  growing  power  of  lan-
guage made possible. Evans (2003) supports this view by
surveying a series of linguistic structures in which some syn-
tactic  rules  must  refer  to  features  of  the  kinship  system
which are common in Australian aboriginal tribes but are
unknown elsewhere. On this basis, we see such linguistic
structures  as  historical  products  reflecting  the  impact  of
various processes of “cultural selection” on emerging struc-
ture.

If one starts with unitary utterances, then symbols that
correspond  to  statements  like  “Take  your  spear  and  go
around the other side of that animal and we will have a bet-
ter chance together of being able to kill it” must each be
important enough, or occur often enough, for the tribe to
agree on a symbol (e.g., arbitrary string of phonemes) and
for each one to replace an elaborate pantomime with a con-
ventionalized utterance of protosign or protospeech. Dis-
covering that separate names could be assigned to each ac-
tor, object, and action would require many words instead of
one to express such an utterance. However, once the num-

120

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

ber  of  utterances  with  overlap  reaches  a  critical  level,
economies of word learning would accrue from building ut-
terances from “reusable” components (cf. the Wray-Kirby
and  “sour  fruit”  scenarios  above).  Separating  verbs  from
nouns lets one learn m ⫹ n ⫹ p words (or less if the same
noun can fill two roles) to be able to form m*n*p of the
most basic utterances. Of course, not all of these combina-
tions will be useful, but the advantage is that new utterances
can now be coined “on the fly,” rather than each novel event
acquiring group mastery of a novel utterance.

Nowak et al. (2000) analyzed conditions under which a
population that had two genes – one for unitary utterances
and one for fractionated utterances – would converge into
a situation in which one gene or the other (and therefore
one type of language or the other) would predominate. But
I feel that this misses the whole point: (1) It assumes that
there is a genetic basis for this alternative, whereas I believe
the basis is historical, without requiring genetic change. (2)
It postulates that the alternatives already exist. I believe it
is necessary to offer a serious analysis of how both unitary
and fractionated utterances came to exist, and of the grad-
ual process of accumulating changes that led from the pre-
dominance of the former to the predominance of the latter.
(3) Moreover, it is not a matter of either/or – modern lan-
guages have a predominance of fractionated utterances but
make wide use of unitary utterances as well.

The spread of these innovations rested on the ability of
other humans not only to imitate the new actions and com-
pounds of actions demonstrated by the innovators, but also
to do so in a way that related increasingly general classes of
symbolic behavior to the classes, events, behaviors, and re-
lationships that they were to represent. Indeed, considera-
tion of the spatial basis for “prepositions” may help show
how  visuomotor  coordination  underlies  some  aspects  of
language (cf. Talmy 2000), whereas the immense variation
in the use of corresponding prepositions even in closely re-
lated  languages  like  English  and  Spanish  shows  how  the
basic functionally grounded semantic-syntactic correspon-
dences have been overlaid by a multitude of later innova-
tions and borrowings.

The transition to Homo sapiens thus may have involved
“language amplification” through increased speech ability
coupled with the ability to name certain actions and objects
separately, followed by the ability to create a potentially un-
limited set of verb-argument structures and the ability to
compound those structures in diverse ways. Recognition of
hierarchical  structure  rather  than  mere  sequencing  pro-
vided the bridge to constituent analysis in language.

8. Towards a neurolinguistics “beyond the

mirror”

Most of the stages of our evolutionary story are not to be
seen so much as replacing “old” capabilities of the ancestral
brain with new ones, but rather, as extending those capa-
bilities by embedding them in an enriched system. I now
build on our account of the evolution of the language-ready
brain to offer a synchronic account of the “layered capabil-
ities” of the modern adult human brain.

Aboitiz and García (1997) offer a neuroanatomical per-
spective on the evolutionary origin of the language areas in
the human brain by analyzing possible homologies between
language areas of the human brain and areas of the monkey

Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language: An evolutionary framework for neurolinguistics

or

Figure 6. Extending the FARS model to include the mirror system for grasping and the language system evolved “atop” this. Note that
this simple figure neither asserts nor denies that the extended mirror system for grasping and the language-supporting system are anatom-
ically separable, nor does it address issues of lateralization. (From Arbib & Bota 2003.)

brain that may offer clues as to the structures of the brains
of our ancestors of 20 million years ago. Arbib and Bota
(2003) summarize the Aboitiz-García and mirror system hy-
potheses and summarize other relevant data on homologies
between different cortical areas in macaque and human to
ground  further  work  on  an  evolutionary  account  of  the
readiness of the human brain for language.

Figure 6 is the diagram Arbib and Bota (2003) used to
synthesize lessons about the language mechanisms of the
human  brain,  extending  a  sketch  for  a  “mirror  neurolin-
guistics” (Arbib 2001b). This figure was designed to elicit
further modeling; it does not have the status of fully imple-
mented models, such as the FARS and MNS models, whose
relation  to,  and  prediction  of,  empirical  results  has  been
probed through computer simulation.

object r AIP r F5canonical
action r PF r F5mirror
scene r Wernicke’s r Broca’s

To start our analysis of Figure 6, note that an over-simple
analysis of praxis, action understanding, and language pro-
duction  might  focus  on  the  following  parallel  parieto-
frontal interactions:
I.
II.
III.
The data on patients A.T. and D.F. reviewed in section 3.1
showed a dissociation between the praxic use of size infor-
mation (parietal) and the “declaration” of that information
either  verbally  or  through  pantomime  (inferotemporal).
D.F. had a lesion allowing signals to flow from V1 towards
posterior  parietal  cortex  (PP)  but  not  from  V1  to  infer-
otemporal  cortex  (IT).  D.F.  could  preshape  accurately
when reaching to grasp an object, even though she was un-

praxis
action understanding
language production

able to declare, either verbally or in pantomime, the visual
parameters that guided the preshape. By contrast, A.T. had
a bilateral posterior parietal lesion. A.T. could use her hand
to pantomime the size of a cylinder, but could not preshape
appropriately when asked to grasp it. This suggests the fol-
lowing scheme:
IV.
V.

Parietal “affordances” r preshape
IT “perception of object” r pantomime or verbally describe
size

That  is,  one  cannot  pantomime  or  verbalize  an  affor-
dance; but rather one needs a “recognition of the object”
(IT) to which attributes can be attributed before one can
express them. Recall now the path shown in Figure 2 from
IT to AIP, both directly and via PFC. I postulate that simi-
lar pathways link IT and PF. I show neither of these path-
ways in Figure 6, but rather show how this pathway might
in the human brain not only take the form needed for praxic
actions but also be “reflected” into a pathway that supports
the  recognition  of  communicative  manual  actions.  We
would then see the “extended PF” of this pathway as func-
tionally integrated with the posterior part of Brodmann’s
area 22, or area Tpt (temporo-parietal) as defined by Gal-
aburda and Sanides (1980). Indeed, lesion-based views of
Wernicke’s area may include not only the posterior part of
Tpt but also (in whole or in part) areas in the human cortex
that correspond to macaque PF (see Arbib & Bota [2003]
for further details). In this way, we see Wernicke’s area as
combining capabilities for recognizing protosign and pro-
tospeech to support a language-ready brain that is capable
of learning signed languages as readily as spoken languages.

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

121

Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language: An evolutionary framework for neurolinguistics

Finally, we note that Arbib and Bota (2003) responded to
the  analysis  of  Aboitiz  and  García  (1997)  by  including  a
number of working memories crucial to the linkage of vi-
sual scene perception, motor planning, and the production
and recognition of language. However, they did not provide
data on the integration of these diverse working memory
systems into their anatomical scheme.

When  building  upon  Figure  6  in  future  work  in  neu-
rolinguistics,  we  need  to  bear  in  mind  the  definition  of
“complex  imitation”  as  the  ability  to  recognize  another’s
performance as a set of familiar movements and then repeat
them, but also to recognize when such a performance com-
bines novel actions that can be approximated by (i.e., more
or less crudely be imitated by) variants of actions already in
the repertoire. Moreover, in discussing the FARS model in
section 3.1, I noted that the interactions shown in Figure 2
are supplemented in the computer implementation of the
model by code representing the role of the basal ganglia in
administering  sequences  of  actions,  and  that  Bischoff-
Grethe et al. (2003) model the possible role of the basal
ganglia in interactions with the pre-SMA in sequence learn-
ing.  Therefore,  I  agree  with  Visalberghi  and  Fragaszy’s
(2002, p. 495) suggestion that “[mirror] neurons provide a
neural substrate for segmenting a stream of action into dis-
crete elements matching those in the observer’s repertoire,
as Byrne (1999) has suggested in connection with his string-
parsing theory of imitation,” while adding that the success
of complex imitation requires that the appropriate motor
system be linked to appropriate working memories (as in
Fig. 6) as well as to pre-SMA and basal ganglia (not shown
in Fig. 6) to extract and execute the overall structure of the
compound action (which may be sequential, or a more gen-
eral  coordinated  control  program  [Arbib  2003]).  Lieber-
man (2002) emphasizes that the roles of Broca’s and Wer-
nicke’s areas must be seen in relation to larger neocortical
and  subcortical  circuits.  He  cites  data  from  studies  of
Broca’s  aphasia,  Parkinson’s  disease,  focal  brain  damage,
and so on, to demonstrate the importance of the basal gan-
glia in sequencing the elements that constitute a complete
motor act, syntactic process, or thought process. Hanakawa
et  al.  (2002)  investigated  numerical,  verbal,  and  spatial
types of nonmotor mental-operation tasks. Parts of the pos-
terior frontal cortex, consistent with the pre-supplementary
motor area (pre-SMA) and the rostral part of the dorsolat-
eral premotor cortex (PMdr), were active during all three
tasks. They also observed activity in the posterior parietal
cortex and cerebellar hemispheres during all three tasks.
An fMRI study showed that PMdr activity during the men-
tal-operation tasks was localized in the depths of the supe-
rior precentral sulcus, which substantially overlapped the
region active during complex finger movements and was lo-
cated dorsomedial to the presumptive frontal eye fields.

Such  papers  are  part  of  the  rapidly  growing  literature
that relates human brain mechanisms for action recogni-
tion, imitation, and language. A full review of such litera-
ture is beyond the scope of the target article, but let me first
list a number of key articles – Binkofski et al. (1999), De-
cety et al. (1997), Fadiga et al. (2002), Grezes et al. (1998),
Grezes  and  Decety  (2001;  2002),  Heiser  et  al.  (2003),
Hickok et al. (1998), Iacoboni et al. (1999; 2001), and Floel
et al. (2003) – and then briefly describe a few others:

Koski et al. (2002) used fMRI to assess the effect of ex-
plicit action goals on neural activity during imitation. Their
results support the hypothesis that areas relevant to motor

122

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

preparation and motor execution are tuned to coding goal-
oriented actions and are in keeping with single-cell record-
ings revealing that neurons in area F5 of the monkey brain
represent  goal-directed  aspects  of  actions.  Grezes  et  al.
(2003) used event-related fMRI to investigate where in the
human  brain  activation  can  be  found  that  reflects  both
canonical and mirror neuronal activity. They found activa-
tion in the intraparietal and ventral limbs of the precentral
sulcus when subjects observed objects and when they exe-
cuted  movements  in  response  to  the  objects  (“canonical
neurons”); and activation in the dorsal premotor cortex, the
intraparietal cortex, the parietal operculum (SII), and the
superior temporal sulcus when subjects observed gestures
(“mirror neurons”). Finally, activations in the ventral pre-
motor  cortex  and  inferior  frontal  gyrus  (Brodmann  area
[BA] 44) were found when subjects imitated gestures and
executed movements in response to objects. These results
suggest that in the human brain, the ventral limb of the pre-
central sulcus may form part of the area designated F5 in
the macaque monkey. It is possible that area 44 forms an
anterior part of F5, though anatomical studies suggest that
it may be a transitional area between the premotor and pre-
frontal cortices.

Manthey et al. (2003) used fMRI to investigate whether
paying  attention  to  objects  versus  movements  modulates
premotor activation during the observation of actions. Par-
ticipants were asked to classify presented movies as show-
ing correct actions, erroneous actions, or senseless move-
ments. Erroneous actions were incorrect either with regard
to employed objects, or to performed movements. The ven-
trolateral premotor cortex (vPMC) and the anterior part of
the intraparietal sulcus (aIPS) were strongly activated dur-
ing the observation of actions in humans. Premotor activa-
tion was dominantly located within BA 6, and sometimes
extended into BA 44. The presentation of object errors and
movement  errors  showed  that  left  premotor  areas  were
more involved in the analysis of objects, whereas right pre-
motor areas were dominant in the analysis of movements.
(Since lateralization is not analyzed in this article, such data
may be a useful springboard for commentaries.)

To test the hypothesis that action recognition and lan-
guage production share a common system, Hamzei et al.
(2003) combined an action recognition task with a language
production  task  and  a  grasping  movement  task.  Action
recognition-related  fMRI  activation  was  observed  in  the
left inferior frontal gyrus and on the border between the in-
ferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and precentral gyrus (PG), the
ventral occipito-temporal junction, the superior and infe-
rior parietal cortex, and in the intraparietal sulcus in the left
hemisphere. An overlap of activations due to language pro-
duction, movement execution, and action recognition was
found in the parietal cortex, the left inferior frontal gyrus,
and  the  IFG-PG  border.  The  activation  peaks  of  action
recognition and verb generation were always different in
single subjects, but no consistent spatial relationship was
detected,  presumably  suggesting  that  action  recognition
and language production share a common functional archi-
tecture, with functional specialization reflecting develop-
mental happenstance.

Several studies provide behavioral evidence supporting
the hypothesis that the system involved in observation and
preparation of grasp movements partially shares the corti-
cal areas involved in speech production. Gentilucci (2003a)
had subjects pronounce either the syllable ba or ga while

Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language: An evolutionary framework for neurolinguistics

observing motor acts of hand grasp directed to objects of
two sizes, and found that both lip aperture and voice peak
amplitude were greater when the observed hand grasp was
directed to the large object. Conversely, Glover and Dixon
(2002; see Glover et al. 2004 for related results) presented
subjects with objects on which were printed either the word
large or small. An effect of the words on grip aperture was
found early in the reach, but this effect declined continu-
ously as the hand approached the target, presumably due to
the effect of visual feedback. Gerlach et al. (2002) showed
that the left ventral premotor cortex is activated during cat-
egorization not only for tools but also for fruits and vegeta-
bles and articles of clothing, relative to animals and non-
manipulable man-made objects. Such findings support the
notion that certain lexical categories may evolve from ac-
tion-based knowledge but are difficult to account for should
knowledge representations in the brain be truly categori-
cally organized.

Several  insights  have  been  gleaned  from  the  study  of
signed language. Corina et al. (2003) used PET to examine
deaf users of ASL as they generated verb signs indepen-
dently  with  their  right  dominant  and  left  nondominant
hands (compared to the repetition of noun signs). Nearly
identical patterns of left inferior frontal and right cerebel-
lum activity were observed, and these were consistent with
patterns  that  have  been  reported  for  spoken  languages.
Thus, lexical-semantic processing in production relies upon
left-hemisphere regions regardless of the modality in which
a language is realized, and, in signing, no matter which hand
is  used.  Horwitz  et  al.  (2003)  studied  the  activation  of
Broca’s area during the production of spoken and signed
language. They showed that BA45, not BA44, was activated
by both speech and signing during the production of lan-
guage  narratives  in  bilingual  subjects  (fluent  from  early
childhood in both ASL and English) with the generation of
complex  movements  and  sounds  as  control.  Conversely,
BA44, not BA45, was activated by the generation of com-
plex articulatory movements of oral-laryngeal or limb mus-
culature. Horwitz et al. therefore conclude that BA45 is the
part  of  Broca’s  area  that  is  fundamental  to  the  modality-
independent aspects of language generation.

Gelfand and Bookheimer (2003), using fMRI, found that
the posterior portion of Broca’s area responded specifically
to  sequence  manipulation  tasks,  whereas  the  left  supra-
marginal gyrus was somewhat more specific to sequencing
phoneme segments. These results suggest that the left pos-
terior inferior frontal gyrus responds not to the sound struc-
ture of language but rather to sequential operations that
may underlie the ability to form words out of dissociable el-
ements.

Much more must be done to take us up the hierarchy
from elementary actions to the recognition and generation
of  novel  compounds  of  such  actions.  Nonetheless,  the
above  preliminary  account  strengthens  the  case  that  no
powerful syntactic mechanisms need have been encoded in
the brain of the first Homo sapiens. Rather, it was the ex-
tension of the imitation-enriched mirror system to support
intended  communication  that  enabled  human  societies,
across many millennia of invention and cultural evolution,
to achieve human languages in the modern sense.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The early stages of building upon “Language within Our Grasp”
(Rizzolatti & Arbib 1998) were conducted during my sabbatical

visits in 1999 to the University of Western Australia and the Insti-
tute of Human Physiology in Parma, Italy, and my conversations
there  with  Robyn  Owens,  E.  J.  Holden,  Giacomo  Rizzolatti,
Morten Christiansen, Giuseppe Cossu, Giuseppe Luppino, Mas-
simo Matelli, Vittorio Gallese, and other colleagues. So many peo-
ple have offered perceptive comments on various results of that
effort (as published in, e.g., Arbib 2001a; 2001b; 2002) that the fol-
lowing list is woefully incomplete – Shannon Casey, Chris Code,
Bob Damper, Kerstin Dautenhahn, Barry Gordon, Jim Hurford,
Bipin Indurkhya, Chrystopher Nehaniv, and Chris Westbury – but
I do hope that all these people (and the BBS referees), whether
named or not, will realize how much I value their thoughtful com-
ments and that they will see how their suggestions and comments
have helped me clarify, correct, and extend my earlier analyses.

Preparation of the present paper was supported in part by a fel-
lowship  from  the  Center  for  Interdisciplinary  Research  of  the
University of Southern California. In particular, this fellowship al-
lowed me to initiate a faculty seminar in September of 2002 at
which  my  ideas  have  been  exposed  to  intense  though  friendly
scrutiny and placed in the context of the range of fascinating work
by the members of the seminar – Amit Almor, Elaine Andersen,
Aude Billard, Mihail Bota, Dani Byrd, Vincent Chen, Karen Em-
morey, Andrew Gordon, James Gordon, Jack Hawkins, Jerry R.
Hobbs, Laurent Itti, Toby Mintz, Stefan Schaal, Craig Stanford,
Jean-Roger Vergnaud, Christoph von der Malsburg, Carolee Win-
stein, Michail Zak, Patricia Zukow-Goldring, and Kie Zuraw.

NOTES

1. Bickerton  (1995)  views  infant  language,  pidgins,  and  the
“language” taught to apes as protolanguages in the sense of a form
of communication whose users can only string together a small
handful of words at a time with little if any syntax. Bickerton hy-
pothesizes that the protolanguage (in my sense) of Homo erectus
was a protolanguage in his sense, in which a few words much like
those of today’s language are uttered a few at a time to convey
meaning without the aid of syntax. I do not assume (or agree with)
this hypothesis.

2. Today’s  signed  languages  are  fully  expressive  human  lan-
guages with a rich syntax and semantics, and are not to be con-
fused with the posited systems of protosign communication. By
the same taken, protospeech is a primitive form of communication
based on vocal gestures but without the richness of modern hu-
man spoken languages.

3. Since we will be concerned in what follows with sign lan-
guage as well as spoken language, the “speaker” and “hearer” may
be  using  hand  and  face  gestures  rather  than  vocal  gestures  for
communication.

4. However, I shall offer below the view that early forms of pro-
tosign provided a scaffolding for the initial development of proto-
speech, rather than holding that protosign was “completed” be-
fore protospeech was “initiated.”

5. I would welcome commentaries on “language-like” aspects
of communication in nonprimates, but the present article is purely
about  changes  within  the  primates  that  led  to  the  human  lan-
guage-ready brain.

6. It could be objected that monkey calls are not “involuntary
communication”  because,  for  example,  vervet  alarm  calls  are
given usually in the presence of conspecifics who would react to
them. However, I would still call this involuntary – this just shows
that two conditions, rather than one, are required to trigger the
call. This is distinct from the human use of language to conduct a
conversation that may have little or no connection to the current
situation.

7. When I speak of a “stage” in phylogeny, I do not have in mind
an all-or-none switch in the genotype that yields a discontinuous
change in the phenotype, but rather the coalescence of a variety
of changes that can be characterized as forming a global pattern
that may emerge over the course of tens or even hundreds of mil-
lennia.

8. Let  me  stress  that  complex  imitation  involves  both  the

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

123

Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language: An evolutionary framework for neurolinguistics

recognition of an action as a certain combination of actions and
the ability to replicate (something like) that combination. Both
skills play a role in the human child’s acquisition of language; the
latter remains important in the adult’s language comprehension.

9. But see note 4 above.
10. The attainment of complex imitation was seen as a crucial
stage of the evolution of language readiness in Arbib (2002), but
was not listed there as a condition for language readiness. I now
see this as a mistake.

11. Unfortunately, space does not permit development of an
argument for this controversial claim. Commentaries pro or con
the hypothesis will be most welcome.

12. I wonder at times whether properties LR1 through LR7 do
indeed support LA1 or whether LA1 should itself be seen as part
of the biological equipment of language readiness. I would wel-
come  commentaries  in  support  of  either  of  these  alternatives.
However, I remain convinced that LR1 through LR7 coupled with
LA1 provide all that is needed for a brain to support LA2, LA3,
and LA4.

13. The pairs (LR6: Beyond the here-and-now 1; LA3: Beyond
the here-and-now 2) and (LR7: Paedomorphy and sociality; LA4:
Learnability) do not appear in Table 1 because the rest of the pa-
per will not add to their brief treatment in section 2.2.

14. Figure 2 provides only a partial overview of the model. The
full model (see Fagg & Arbib 1998 for more details) includes a
number of brain regions, offering schematic models for some and
detailed neural-network models for others. The model has been
implemented  on  the  computer  so  that  simulations  can  demon-
strate how the activities of different populations vary to explain the
linkage between visual affordance and manual grasp.

15. To keep the exposition compact, in what follows I will use
without further explanation the abbreviations for the brain regions
not  yet  discussed.  The  reader  wanting  to  see  the  abbreviations
spelled out, as well as a brief exposition of data related to the hy-
pothesized linkage of schemas to brain structures, is referred to
Oztop and Arbib (2002).

16. Estimates for the timetable for hominid evolution (I use
here those given by Gamble 1994, see his Fig. 4.2) are 20 million
years ago for the divergence of monkeys from the line that led to
humans and apes, and 5 million years ago for the divergence of the
hominid line from the line that led to modern apes.

17. For more on “chimpanzee culture,” see Whiten et al. (2001)
and the Chimpanzee Cultures Web site: http://culture.st-and.ac.
uk:16080/chimp/, which gives access to an online database that
describes the cultural variations in chimpanzee behavior and shows
behavior distributions across the sites in Africa where long-term
studies of chimpanzees have been conducted in the wild.

18. Recall the observation (Note 8) that both the recognition
of an action as a certain combination of actions and the ability to
replicate (something like) that combination play a role in the hu-
man child’s acquisition of language, while the former remains im-
portant in the adult’s language comprehension. But note, too, that
stage S4 only takes us to complex imitation of praxic actions; Sec-
tions 5 and 6 address the transition to an open system of commu-
nicative actions.

19. As ahistorical support for this, note that airplane is signed
in American Sign Language (ASL) with tiny repeated movements
of a specific handshape, whereas fly is signed by moving the same
handshape  along  an  extended  trajectory  (Supalla  &  Newport
1978). I say “ahistorical” because such signs are part of a modern
human language rather than holdovers from protosign. Nonethe-
less, they exemplify the mixture of iconicity and convention that,
I claim, distinguishes protosign from pantomime.

20. Of course, relatively few Chinese characters are so picto-
graphic  in  origin.  For  a  fuller  account  of  the  integration  of  se-
mantic and phonetic elements in Chinese characters (and a com-
parison  with  Sumerian  logograms)  see  Chapter  3  of  Coulmas
2003.

21. Of  course,  those  signs  that  most  clearly  resemble  pan-
tomimes will be easier for the nonsigner to recognize, just as cer-

124

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

tain  Chinese  characters  are  easier  for  the  novice  to  recognize.
Shannon Casey (personal communication) notes that moving the
hands in space to represent actions involving people interacting
with people, animals, or other objects is found in signed languages
in verbs called “spatial verbs” or “verbs of motion and location.”
These verbs can be used with handshapes to represent people or
objects called “semantic classifiers” and “size and shape specifiers”
(Supalla 1986; see p. 196 for a description of these classifiers and
p. 211 for figures of them). Hence, to describe giving someone a
cup, the ASL signer may either use the standard give handshape
(palm up with fingertips and thumb-tip touching) or use an open,
curved handshape with the fingertips and thumb-tip apart and the
palm to the side (as if holding a cup). Similarly, to describe giving
someone a thick book, the signer can use a handshape with the
palm facing up, fingertips pointing outward and thumb also point-
ing outward with about an inch of space between the thumb and
fingertips (as if holding a book). In her own research Casey (2003)
has found that hearing subjects with no knowledge of a signed lan-
guage do produce gestures resembling classifiers. Stokoe (2001,
pp. 188–91) relates the use of shape classifiers in ASL to the use
of shape classifiers in spoken Native American languages.

22. Added  in  proof:  Hurford  notes  that  this  suggestion  was

made and discarded prior to publication of Hurford (2004).

23. Such developments and inventions may have occurred very
slowly over the course of many (perhaps even thousands) of gen-
erations  during  which  expansion  of  the  proto-vocabulary  was
piecemeal; it may then have been a major turning point in human
history when it was realized that symbols could be created ad li-
bitum and this realization was passed on to future generations. See
also Note 25.

24. Where  Corballis  focuses  on  the  FOXP2 gene,  Crow
(2002a) links lateralization and human speciation to a key muta-
tion which may have speciated on a change in a homologous re-
gion of the X and Y chromosomes.

25. I use the word “genius” advisedly. I believe that much work
on language evolution has been crippled by the inability to imag-
ine that things we take for granted were in no way a priori obvi-
ous, or to see that current generalities were by no means easy to
discern in the particularities that they embrace. Consider, for ex-
ample, that Archimedes (c. 287–212 bce) had the essential idea
of the integral calculus, but it took almost 2,000 years before New-
ton (1642–1727) and Leibniz (1646–1716) found notations that
could express the generality implicit in his specific examples and
hence unleash an explosion of mathematical innovation. I contend
that language, like mathematics, has evolved culturally by such fits
and starts. Note 23.

26. Indeed, adjectives are not the “natural category” they may
appear to be. As Dixon (1997, pp. 142 et seq.) observes, there are
two kinds of adjective classes across human languages: (1) an open
class with hundreds of members (as in English); (2) a small closed
class. Languages with small adjective classes are found in every
continent except Europe. Igbo, from west Africa, has just eight ad-
jectives: large and small; black/dark and white/light; new and old;
and good and bad. Concepts that refer to physical properties tend
to be placed in the verb class (e.g., “the stone heavies”) and words
referring to human propensities tend to be nouns (e.g., “she has
cleverness”).

27. Leaving aside the fact that the monkey probably does not

know that Leo’s name is “Leo.”

28. Not all the symbols need be meaningless; some signs of a
signed  language  can  be  recognized  as  conventionalized  pan-
tomime, and some Chinese characters can be recognized as con-
ventionalized pictures. But we have already noted that relatively
few Chinese characters are pictographic in origin. Similarly, many
signs have no link to pantomime. As Coulmas (2003) shows us in
analyzing writing systems  – but the point holds equally well for
speech and sign – the mixture of economy of expression and in-
creasing range of expression leads to more and more of a symbol
being built up from meaningless components.

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

Open Peer Commentary

Speech and gesture are mediated by
independent systems

Anna M. Barrett,a Anne L. Foundas,b and
Kenneth M. Heilmanc
aDepartment of Neurology and Neural and Behavioral Sciences,
Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033;
bDepartment of Psychiatry and Neurology, Tulane University School of
Medicine and the Veterans Affairs Medical Center, New Orleans, LA 70115;
cCollege of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, and North Florida South
Georgia Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Gainesville, FL 32610.
ambarrett@psu.edu
heilman@neurology.ufl.edu
http://www.som.tulane.edu/neurograd/foundahm.htm#Foundas

foundas@tulane.edu

Abstract: Arbib suggests that language emerged in direct relation to man-
ual gestural communication, that Broca’s area participates in producing
and imitating gestures, and that emotional facial expressions contributed
to gesture-language coevolution. We discuss functional and structural ev-
idence supporting localization of the neuronal modules controlling limb
praxis, speech and language, and emotional communication. Current evi-
dence supports completely independent limb praxis and speech/language
systems.

Arbib suggests that language coevolved with a neuroanatomic-be-
havioral system specialized for manual gesture production and im-
itation, relying upon a shared anatomic substrate. He suggests that
the region adapted for this purpose corresponds to Broca’s area in
the human brain and area F5 in the monkey. Although this is an
interesting hypothesis, there are behavioral and anatomic studies
inconsistent with this theory.

First, the target article treats four forelimb gesture classes in-
terchangeably: volitional meaningless movements or movements
unrelated  to  tool  use  (e.g.,  reaching  or  grasping  movements),
movements standing for objects (emblems, e.g., flapping hands
for “bird”), tool use pantomimes (limb praxis), and movements
carrying linguistic meaning (signs). A comprehensive discussion of
the  literature  supporting  separable  systems  controlling  these
movement classes is beyond the scope of this commentary. The
term “gesture” here refers to limb praxis unless otherwise noted.
The  anatomic  evidence  is  weak  regarding  Broca’s  area  as  a
shared neuronal substrate for human gesture and language. Al-
though  abnormal  skilled  learned  purposive  movements  (limb
apraxia) may co-occur with speech and language disorders (apha-
sia), these two conditions are anatomically and functionally disso-
ciable (Kertesz et al. 1984; Liepmann 1920; Papagno et al. 1993;
see Heilman & Rothi 2003 for a review). Indeed, in left-handed
subjects, brain regions supporting limb praxis may be localized in
the right hemisphere, and those supporting speech and language,
in the left hemisphere (Heilman et al. 1973; Valenstein & Heil-
man 1979). Right-handed subjects with limb apraxia and gestural
production  and  imitation  deficits  are  hypothesized  to  have  lost
function in brain regions supporting time-space-movement rep-
resentations. Most have damage to posterior, rather than anterior,
cortical areas, usually the inferior parietal lobe (Rothi et al. 1994).
A report of an isolated disorder of gesture imitation was associated
with posterior, not frontal, cortical injury (Ochipa et al. 1994). Pre-
motor lesions have been associated with limb apraxia, but these le-
sions were in the supplementary motor area (Watson et al. 1986)
or the convexity premotor cortex (superior to Broca’s area; Barrett
et al. 1998). Lesions in Broca’s area can cause oral or buccofacial
apraxia and apraxia of speech. However, although limb apraxia is
associated with Broca’s aphasia (Albert et al. 1981), we could find
no  reports  of  patients  with  limb  apraxia  for  whom  there  was

anatomic evidence of a brain lesion restricted to Broca’s area. Pa-
tients with nonfluent aphasias (e.g., Broca’s aphasia) can acquire
simplified signs and gestural emblems (Amerind; not a signed lan-
guage) as an alternative method of communication (Albert et al.
1981; Skelly 1974) and are preferred candidates over patients with
aphasia from posterior brain injury. If coactivity of the speech-lan-
guage and praxis systems led evolutionarily to refinement of these
functional systems, one might expect coactivity to be associated
with competent gestural and linguistic performance. However, in
normal subjects, spontaneously speaking while gesturing is asso-
ciated with poorer limb praxis performance (Barrett et al. 2002).
Thus, anatomic-behavioral evidence in humans does not support
Broca’s area as necessary for programming skilled learned fore-
limb gestures.

Although Arbib posits a relationship between primate orofacial
gestures, vocalizations communicating emotional state, and hu-
man language, human speech-language functions may be local-
ized quite differently from emotionally communicative functions.
In most humans, the left hemisphere may be dominant in the con-
trol of vocalization associated with propositional speech, but the
right hemisphere often controls vocalization associated with emo-
tional  prosody  (Heilman  et  al.  2000;  Ross  1981;  Tucker  et  al.
1977), automatic speech (e.g., the Lord’s Prayer; Speedie et al.
1993) and singing (Wildgruber et al. 1996). In patients with apha-
sia after left-hemisphere injury, comprehension and production of
affective vocal prosody and emotional facial expressions may also
be relatively spared (Barrett et al. 1999; Kanter et al. 1986). This
double dissociation argues against left-hemisphere dominance for
comprehending, imitating, or producing emotional facial expres-
sion or prosody.

Lastly, there is evidence that brain anatomical regions mediat-
ing language functions are not truly homologues to the equivalent
regions in primates. In humans, the classic Broca’s area is not one
functional unit but is comprised of two anatomical subregions dif-
fering  in  gross  morphology,  microscopic  cytoarchitectonic  fea-
tures, and functionally (Foundas et al. 1998). The human Broca’s
area  includes  the  pars  triangularis  (PTR)  and  pars  opercularis
(POP), which may mediate different functions. The PTR is com-
prised  of  higher-order  heteromodal-association  cortex  suited  to
complex cross-modal associations typical of higher-order linguis-
tic functions (e.g., syntax, lexical semantics), whereas the POP is
comprised of motor-association cortex suited to articulatory and
motor speech functions. In a lesion study, Tonkonogy and Good-
glass (1981) reported differences between two patients with de-
limited Broca subregion lesions. A patient with a lesion restricted
to the PTR had linguistic deficits, whereas the patient with a le-
sion to the POP had disordered articulation and fluency, but pre-
served higher-order language functions. Using functional MRI to
study  phonemic  versus  semantic  fluency  in  the  inferior  frontal
gyrus, Paulesu et al. (1997) also found functional heterogeneity
within  Broca’s  area.  Whereas  phonemic  and  semantic  fluency
tasks activated the PTR, only phonemic fluency tasks activated the
POP. Hence, the anterior triangular portion of Broca’s area (PTR)
and the POP may be functionally dissociated, with the PTR func-
tioning more critically in lexical retrieval, and the POP selectively
subserving articulatory motor speech functions. Nonhuman pri-
mates may not have a homologue to the PTR (Brodmann’s area
45). Thus, rather than being a PTR homologue, area F5 in the
monkey  may  represent  the  human  POP  (Brodmann’s  area  44),
more directly linked to vocalization.

Arbib discusses the possibility that some forms of limb praxis
and speech/language function may draw upon the ability to rep-
resent  symbolic  meaning.  Although  not  all  people  with  limb
apraxia or aphasia demonstrate a loss of action semantics or lin-
guistic semantics, and Liepmann (1905) rejected asymbolia as a
sole explanation for limb apraxia, some patients with limb apraxia
(e.g.,  conceptual  apraxia;  Heilman  &  Rothi  2003;  Raymer  &
Ochipa  1997)  demonstrate  abnormal  action-meaning  systems
apart from gestural tasks. Whether a separation of action seman-
tics and linguistic semantics in the modern human brain devel-

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

125

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

substrings” (sect. 7, para. 3). But won’t similar substrings also oc-
cur in unitary utterances that have nothing to do with fire? Here
he is on the horns of a dilemma. If he thinks they will not, he has
smuggled in a ready-made word, and if all “similar substrings” be-
have similarly, a holistic stage becomes superfluous – all the sep-
arate words of a synthetic language are already present, clumsily
disguised. If he thinks they will – and given the limited number of
possible syllables even in modern languages, they will probably oc-
cur more often in sequences that have nothing to do with fire –
why should they be taken as meaning “fire” in the rarer cases, and
what will similar strings in other contexts be assumed to mean?
And even before this dilemma can be addressed, Arbib must spec-
ify what would count as “similar enough” and explain why pho-
netic  or  gestural  similarities  would  not  be  eroded  by  natural
change processes long before hominids could correlate them with
similarities of meaning. Moreover, to extract a symbol meaning
“fire” from a holistic utterance, our ancestors must first have had
the semantic concept of fire, and it becomes wholly unclear why,
instead of going the roundabout holistic route, they could not im-
mediately have given that concept a (signed or spoken) label. Real-
world  objects  can  be  ostensively  defined;  events  and  situations
cannot.

Two substantive issues lie at the heart of language evolution:
how symbolism emerged, and how syntax emerged. No treatment
that fails to deal with both can be taken seriously. Indeed, sym-
bolism (as distinct from iconic or indexical reference, distinctions
that  Arbib  nowhere  makes)  has  seemed  to  some  (e.g.,  Deacon
1997) to be the Rubicon between our species and others. Arbib
mentions it several times, hypothesizing it as a “support” for pro-
tolanguage and noting the necessity for its “increasing sophistica-
tion” as true language emerges. But at no point does he even ac-
knowledge the problem of how such an evolutionary novelty could
have developed.

Syntax makes an even better candidate for a human apomorphy,
since even with explicit instruction our nearest relatives fail to ac-
quire the rudiments of it (Givon 2004). Arbib’s dismissal of syntax
as a “historical phenomenon” makes such uniqueness hard to ex-
plain. According to him, “Words as we know them then coevolved
culturally  with  syntax  through  fractionation”  (sect.  2,  para.  2).
Even if syntax meant only the most frequent word-order in sim-
ple affirmative sentences, this claim might be tricky to defend. In
fact, syntax depends on a wide variety of relationships within com-
plex hierarchical structures. Where do these structures and rela-
tionships come from? Arbib, ignoring the half-century of linguis-
tic  research  that  has  revealed  (if  not  explained)  them,  remains
silent on this.

Arbib’s treatment claims to go “beyond the mirror.” However,
what he offers is only a smoke-and-mirrors version of language
evolution, one in which all the real issues are obscured. His flow-
charts and neurological references may look impressive, but they
tell us nothing about the central problems of the field.

NOTE

1. It is surely worth reminding readers that all the features of mirror
neurons (except for their catchy title) were described by David Perrett and
his associates (Perrett et al. 1982; 1985) more than two decades ago – a
fact seldom acknowledged in contemporary accounts, including Arbib’s.

oped over the course of human evolution, however, unfortunately
cannot be determined at our present level of knowledge.

Beyond the mirror neuron – the smoke
neuron?

Derek Bickerton
Department of Linguistics, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96822.
derbick@hawaii.rr.com

Abstract: Mirror neurons form a poor basis for Arbib’s account of lan-
guage evolution, failing to explain the creativity that must precede imita-
tion, and requiring capacities (improbable in hominids) for categorizing
situations and unambiguously miming them. They also commit Arbib to
an implausible holophrastic protolanguage. His model is further vitiated
by failure to address the origins of symbolization and the real nature of syn-
tax.

Mirror-neuron theory is the second-latest (FOXP2 is the latest) in
a series of magic-bullet solutions to the problems of language evo-
lution. To his credit, Arbib realizes it could not account for all of
language. Unfortunately, his attempts to go beyond it fall far short
of adequacy.

Even as a significant component of language, mirror neurons
are dubious. There cannot be imitation unless someone has first
created something to imitate, and mirror neurons offer no clue as
to how totally novel sequences  – complex ones, at that  – could
have been created ab ovo. Moreover, when someone addresses
you, you don’t just imitate what they said (unless you want to be
thought an idiot); you say something equally novel.

Arbib treats as wholly unproblematic both the category “fre-
quently  occurring  situation”  and  the  capacity  of  pantomime  to
represent  such  situations.  Situations,  frequent  or  otherwise,  do
not come with labels attached; indeed, it is questionable whether
any species could isolate “a situation” from the unbroken, ongoing
stream of experience unless it already had a language with which
to do so. For this task requires abstracting away from a potentially
infinite number of irrelevant features  – place, weather, time of
day, number and identity of participants, and on and on. How,
short of mind-reading powers that would leave professional clair-
voyants gasping, could our alingual ancestors have known which
features seemed relevant to the sender of the message, and which
did not?

If  Arbib  answers  “through  pantomime,”  one  assumes  he  has
never played charades. Those who have, know that even with the
help of a large set of “disambiguating signs” – stereotypic gestures
for “film title,” “book title,” and so on, elaborate routines of fin-
ger-counting to provide numbers of words and syllables – partic-
ipants with all the resources of modern human language and cog-
nition find it often difficult and sometimes impossible to guess
what the pantomimer is trying to represent. When what is to be
represented is not a monosyllabic word but something as complex
as “The alpha male has killed a meat animal and now the tribe has
a chance to feast together. Yum, yum!” or “Take your spear and go
round  the  other  side  of  that  animal  and  we  will  have  a  better
chance of being able to kill it” (Arbib’s own examples, sect. 7, para.
2), the likelihood of successful guessing becomes infinitesimally
small.

Arbib  does  see  what  I  pointed  out  more  than  a  decade  ago
(Bickerton 1990, pp. 97–98),1 that any espousal of mirror neurons
commits one to a holistic (Wray 1998; 2000) rather than a synthetic
protolanguage  – one that would have to represent “bird flying”
with one symbol, rather than two (“bird” and “flying”) as all con-
temporary  languages  do  (see  Bickerton  [2003]  and  especially
Tallerman [2004] for discussion). True language is then supposed
to  develop  straightforwardly  through  the  “fractionation”  of  this
protolanguage. Arbib asks us to “imagine that a tribe has two uni-
tary utterances concerning fire which, by chance, contain similar

126

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

The evolutionary link between mirror neurons
and imitation: An evolutionary adaptive
agents model

Elhanan Borensteina and Eytan Ruppina,b
aSchool of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel;
bSchool of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel.
http://www.cs.tau.ac.il/~borens
borens@post.tau.ac.il
ruppin@post.tau.ac.il
http://www.cs.tau.ac.il/~ruppin

Abstract: This commentary validates the fundamental evolutionary inter-
connection between the emergence of imitation and the mirror system.
We present a novel computational framework for studying the evolution-
ary origins of imitative behavior and examining the emerging underlying
mechanisms. Evolutionary adaptive agents that evolved in this framework
demonstrate the emergence of neural “mirror” mechanisms analogous to
those found in biological systems.

Uncovering  the  evolutionary  origins  of  neural  mechanisms  is
bound to be a difficult task; fossil records or even genomic data
can provide very little help. Hence, the author of the target arti-
cle  should  be  commended  for  laying  out  a  comprehensive  and
thorough theory for the evolution of imitation and language. In
particular, in considering the first stages in the evolution of lan-
guage, Arbib argues that the mirror system initially evolved to pro-
vide a visual feedback on one’s own action, bestowing also the abil-
ity to understand the actions of others (stage S2), and that further
evolution was required for this system to support the copying of
actions and eventually imitation (stages S3 and S4). However, the
functional link between the mirror system and the capacity to im-
itate, although compelling, has not yet been demonstrated clearly.
We wish to demonstrate that the existence of a mirror system, ca-
pable of matching the actions of self to observed actions of others,
is fundamentally linked to imitative behavior and that, in fact, the
evolution of imitation promotes the emergence of neural mirror-
ing.

Neurally  driven  evolutionary  adaptive  agents  (Ruppin  2002)
form  an  appealing  and  intuitive  approach  for  studying  and  ob-
taining insights into the evolutionary origins of the mirror system.
These agents, controlled by an artificial neural-network “brain,”
inhabit an artificial environment and are evaluated according to
their success in performing a certain task. The agents’ neurocon-
trollers evolve via genetic algorithms that encapsulate some of the
essential  characteristics  of  natural  evolution  (e.g.,  inheritance,
variation, and selection).

We have recently presented such a novel computational model
for studying the emergence of imitative behavior and the mirror
system (Borenstein & Ruppin 2004; 2005). In contradistinction to
previous engineering-based approaches that explicitly incorporate
biologically inspired models of imitation (Billard 2000; Demiris &
Hayes 2002; Demiris & Johnson 2003; Marom et al. 2002; Oztop
& Arbib 2002), we employ an evolutionary framework and exam-
ine the mechanism that evolved to support imitation. Because it is
an emerging mechanism (rather than an engineered one), we be-
lieve it is likely to share the same fundamental principles driving
natural systems.

In our model, a population of agents evolves to perform specific
actions  successfully  according  to  certain  environmental  cues.
Each  agent’s  controller  is  an  adaptive  neural  network,  wherein
synaptic weights can vary over time according to various Hebbian
learning rules. The genome of these agents thus encodes not only
the initial synaptic weights but also the specific learning rule and
learning rate that govern the dynamics of each synapse (Floreano
& Urzelai 2000). Agents are placed in a changing environment
that can take one of several “world states” and should learn to per-
form  the  appropriate  action  in  each  world  state.  However,  the
mapping between the possible world states and appropriate ac-
tions is randomly selected anew in the beginning of the agent’s life,
preventing a successful behavior from becoming genetically de-
termined. Agents can infer the appropriate state-action mapping

Figure 1 (Borenstein & Ruppin). The agent’s sensorimotor sys-
tem and neurocontroller. The sensory input is binary and includes
the current world state and a retinal “image” of the demonstrator’s
action (when visible). The retinal image for each possible demon-
strator’s action and a retinal input example are illustrated. The mo-
tor output determines which actions are executed by the agent.
The network synapses are adaptive, and their connection strength
may change during life according to the specified learning rules.

only from an occasional retinal-sensory input of a demonstrator,
successfully performing the appropriate action in each world state
(Fig. 1). These settings promote the emergence of an imitation-
based learning strategy, although no such strategy is explicitly in-
troduced into the model.

Applying  this  model,  we  successfully  developed  evolutionary
adaptive agents capable of learning by imitation. After only a few
demonstrations,  agents  successfully  master  the  behavioral  task,
regularly executing the proper action in each world state. More-
over, examining the dynamics of the neural mechanisms that have
emerged, we found that many of these agents embody a neural
mirroring  device  analogous  to  that  found  in  biological  systems.
That is, certain neurons in the network’s hidden layer are each as-
sociated with a certain action and discharge only when this action
is either executed by the agent or observed (Fig. 2). Further analy-
sis  of  these  networks  reveals  complex  dynamics,  incorporating
both pre-wired perceptual-motor coupling and learned state-ac-
tion associations, to accomplish the required task.

This  framework  provides  a  fully  accessible,  yet  biologically
plausible, distilled model for imitation and can serve as a vehicle
to study the mechanisms that underlie imitation in biological sys-
tems. In particular, this simple model demonstrates the crucial
role of the mirror system in imitative behavior; in our model, mir-
ror neurons’ emergence is derived solely from the necessity to im-
itate observed actions. These findings validate the strong link be-
tween the capacity to imitate and the ability to match observed
and executed actions and thus support Arbib’s claim for the func-
tional links between the mirror system and imitation. However,
whereas Arbib hypothesizes that the evolution of the mirror sys-
tem preceded the evolution of imitation, this model additionally
suggests an alternative possible evolutionary route, grounding the
emergence of mirror neurons in the evolution of imitative behav-
ior.  Evidently,  at  least  in  this  simple  evolutionary  framework,
neural mirroring can coevolve in parallel with the evolution of im-
itation. We believe that evolutionary adaptive agents models, such
as the one described above, form a promising test bed for study-
ing the evolution of various neural mechanisms that underlie com-
plex cognitive behaviors. Further research of artificially evolving
systems can shed new light on some of the key issues concerning
the evolution of perception, imitation, and language.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Elhanan  Borenstein  is  supported  by  the  Yeshaya  Horowitz  Association
through the Center for Complexity Science.

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

127

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

(a) Neuron h4

y
t
i
v
i
t
c
A
 
n
o
r
u
e
N

y
t
i
v
i
t
c
A
 
n
o
r
u
e
N

 

y
t
i
v
i
t
c
A
n
o
r
u
e
N

1

0.5

0
100

1

0.5

0
100

1

0.5

0
100

110

120

130

110

120

130

110

120

130

140

150

160

Time Step

(b)

Neuron

h5

140

150

160

Time Step

(c) Neuron h6

140

150

160

Time Step

170

180

190

200

170

180

190

200

170

180

190

200

Figure 2 (Borenstein & Ruppin). The activation level of three hidden neurons in a specific successful agent during time steps 100 to
200. Circles, squares, diamonds, and triangles represent the four possible actions in the repertoire. An empty shape indicates that the
action was only observed but not executed, a filled shape indicates that the action was executed by the agent (stimulated by a visible
world state) but not observed, and a dotted shape indicates time steps in which the action was both observed and executed. Evidently,
each of these neurons is associated with one specific action and discharges whenever this action is observed or executed.

Sharpening Occam’s razor: Is there need for
a hand-signing stage prior to vocal
communication?

Conrado Bosman, Vladimir López, and Francisco Aboitiz
Departimento Psiquiatría, Facultad de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad
Católica de Chile, Casilla 114-D Santiago 1, Chile. cbosman@med.puc.cl
vlopezh@puc.cl

http://www.neuro.cl

faboitiz@puc.cl

Abstract: We commend Arbib for his original proposal that a mirror neu-
ron system may have participated in language origins. However, in our view
he proposes a complex evolutionary scenario that could be more parsimo-
nious. We see no necessity to propose a hand-based signing stage as ances-
tral  to  vocal  communication.  The  prefrontal  system  involved  in  human
speech may have its precursors in the monkey’s inferior frontal cortical do-
main, which is responsive to vocalizations and is related to laryngeal control.

In the target article, Arbib extends his earlier hypothesis about the
role of mirror neurons for grasping in the motor control of lan-
guage  (Rizzolatti  &  Arbib  1998),  to  a  more  detailed  and  fine-
grained scenario for language evolution. We agree with and cele-
brate the main proposals that a mirror neuron system has had a
fundamental role in the evolution of human communication and
that imitation was important in prelinguistic evolution. We also
agree that there has probably been an important vocal-gestural in-

128

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

teraction in the evolution of communication. In these and other
aspects, our viewpoints complement each other (Aboitiz & García
1997). We proposed that language networks originated as a spe-
cialization from ancestral working memory networks involved in
vocal communication, and Figure 6 of the target article is a good
attempt to synthesize both hypotheses. However, we are not so
sure yet about the claim that gestural language was a precursor for
vocal communication, for several reasons:

First,  phylogenetic  evidence  indicates  that  in  nonhuman  pri-
mates, vocal communication transmits external meaning (i.e., about
events in the world) and is more diverse than gestural communica-
tion (Acardi 2003; Leavens 2003; Seyfarth & Cheney 2003a). Sec-
ond, there is evidence suggesting that the control of vocalizations in
the monkey could be partly carried out by cortical areas close to F5
and does not depend exclusively on the anterior cingulate cortex. If
this is so, the neural precursor for language would not need to be
sought in a hand-based coordination system. For example, in the
monkey there is an important overlap between area F5 and the cor-
tical larynx representation (Jürgens 2003). Electrical stimulation of
this area can elicit vocal fold movements (Hast et al. 1974), and cor-
tical lesions in the supplementary motor area can significantly re-
duce the total number of vocalizations emitted by monkeys (Gemba
et al. 1997; Kirzinger & Jürgens 1982). Furthermore, Romanski and
Goldman-Rakic (2002) recently described, in Brodmann areas 12
and 45 of the monkey, neurons that respond strongly to vocalizations.

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

For these reasons, we suggested that this frontal auditory/mo-
tor domain may belong to, or be the precursor of, a vocalization
mirror system similar to the mirror system for grasping, which in
hominids participated in vocal imitative behavior, allowing them
to  compare  heard  vocalizations  with  their  own  productions
(Bosman et al. 2004; Jürgens 2003). All it would take to develop
this system into a complex, voluntary vocalizing system might be
a refinement of the respective circuits and increasing cortico-bul-
bar control. In this line, evidence indicates a phylogenetic trend
from nonhuman primates to humans towards increasing cortical
control of the tongue, which may be related to the superior role
the tongue plays in speech (Jürgens & Alipour 2002).

In parallel to this evidence, a very recent fMRI study has demon-
strated that in humans, listening to speech activates a superior por-
tion  of  the  ventral  premotor  cortex  that  largely  overlaps  with  a
speech-production motor area (Wilson et al. 2004). This evidence
suggests the existence of a human vocalization mirror system, per-
haps derived from the regions in the monkey described above. In
consequence, we think that a more parsimonious hypothesis could
be that instead of a serial dependence of vocal communication upon
gestural communication, both coevolved to a large extent; that is,
both developed their own circuitry in parallel, with a high degree of
interaction between the two systems (Izumi & Kojima 2004).

Against these arguments, it has been claimed that in nonhuman
primates, cortical control over hand movements is stronger than
control  of  vocalizations,  which  partly  explains  why  apes  can  be
taught  sign  language  and  not  vocal  communication  (Corballis
2003a). However, in our view this does not imply that gestural com-
munication must be ancestral to vocal communication. The same or
even more behavioral flexibility (including combinatorial abilities)
than that observed in hand coordination, may have developed in vo-
cal communication by elaborating on preexisting vocal circuits. A
similar situation may be observed in the elephant’s trunk: the neural
machinery  controlling  the  trunk  probably  developed  on  its  own,
without  the  necessity  of  borrowing  a  coordination  system  from
other motor devices (Pinker 1995). In addition, the presumed an-
cestral signing stage remains highly speculative, there being still no
evidence for it. Summarizing, since in monkeys and apes most com-
munication is vocal, and given that there is an incipient prefrontal
control for vocalizations in them, we see no necessity to propose a
stage of gestural communication preceding “protospeech.”

Finally, we would like to comment on the contrast previously
made by Arbib and Bota (2003), which we think may be mislead-
ing, between their theory being “prospective” (finding what is in
the monkey  – hand coordination  – which may have served as a
substrate for human language), and our theory (Aboitiz & García
1997) being “retrospective” (looking at what is in the human brain
– working memory – and tracking it back to the monkey brain).
Aboitiz  and  García  (1997)  followed  standard  phylogenetic
methodology: first, the study identified in the monkey the net-
works that can be homologous to the language-related neural net-
works; second, it asked about the functions of these networks in
the monkey and in the human, one of which is working memory.
A good analogy for this strategy comes from the evolution of the
eye (Dawkins 1996): Although image formation is a highly derived
characteristic, there are more basic functions such as photorecep-
tion, which are central to vision and shared by other species whose
visual organs lack image-forming properties; these functions permit
us to track the phylogenetic ancestry of the eyes. Likewise, Aboitiz
and García (1997) point to a function (working memory) that is pres-
ent in both the human and the monkey and participates in language
processing (Aboitiz et al., in press; Smith & Jonides 1998). On the
other hand, although hand coordination networks are present in
both species, at this point there is no evidence for the involvement
of the hand control system in human linguistic processing.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Part of the work referred to in this commentary was financed by the Mil-
lennium Center for Integrative Neuroscience. C. Bosman is supported by
MECESUP PUC0005.

Action planning supplements mirror systems
in language evolution

Bruce Bridgeman
Department of Psychology, Social Sciences 2, University of California, Santa
Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA 95064. bruceb@ucsc.edu
http://psych.ucsc.edu/Faculty/bBridge.shtml

Abstract: Mirror systems must be supplemented by a planning capability
to allow language to evolve. A capability for creating, storing, and execut-
ing plans for sequences of actions, having evolved in primates, was applied
to sequences of communicatory acts. Language could exploit this already-
existing capability. Further steps in language evolution may parallel steps
seen in the development of modern children.

Because  the  functional  basis  for  language  capability  lies  in  the
brain, it is sensible to look to brain evolution for insight into the
evolution of language. Though the recently discovered mirror sys-
tem in primates offers possibilities for the evolution of capabilities
necessary for language, it is not enough to do the whole job. In-
deed,  the  well-developed  mirror  system  of  monkeys  in  the  ab-
sence of language shows that something more is needed, as Arbib
points out. In emphasizing the mirror neuron system, a here-and-
now system, Arbib makes a convincing case that mirror neurons
are important in language evolution. A second need is for hierar-
chical structure rather than mere sequencing (target article, sect.
7, para. 13). This commentary will elaborate on that need and how
it is met.

A key power of language is the use of sequences of symbols in
a grammatical system. For the ability to handle sequences, evolu-
tion of primate planning mechanisms is essential. Complementary
to the mirror-neuron evolution story is the increasing ability of
primates to plan sequences of actions, for instance in preparing
and using tools. Actions must be planned in the brain before the
sequence  starts,  and  must  be  executed  in  a  particular  order  to
achieve  success.  The  organization  is  hierarchical,  with  smaller
tasks  embedded  in  larger  ones.  The  lateral  prefrontal  cortex  is
probably the location of the machinery that produces, stores, and
executes  such  plans.  As  planning  abilities  improved  over  the
course of primate evolution, the planning of sequences of actions
loomed ever greater in importance.

In this conception, a critical event in the evolution of language
was the use of this growing capability for planning to generate not
sequences of actions, but sequences of words (Bridgeman 1992).
This idea addresses two of the central puzzles of language evolu-
tion – first, how such a complex capability could evolve in such a
short time, and second, how it could evolve in small steps, each
useful immediately. The solution to the first problem is that lan-
guage is a new capability made mostly of old neurological parts,
among them the mirror system and the planning capability.

To examine the second problem, the small steps, we can look to
human development for hints about how the evolution of language
may have proceeded, to the genetic remnants of earlier adapta-
tions that remain in modern humans. The importance of gesture
is clear from ontogeny as well as neurology, as most infants achieve
a well-developed gestural communication before the first word.
The gestures, although they eclipse the stereotyped call systems
of other animals, remain single communications fixed in the here-
and-now. The first words occur in combination with gesture and
context to create useful communications with minimal verbal con-
tent.

Arbib’s suggestion (sect. 2, para. 2) – that single utterances of
Homo  erectus and  early  Homo  sapiens could  convey  complex
meanings  that  modern  languages  achieve  only  with  longish
phrases – is unlikely to be accurate. Arbib’s comparison to mon-
key calls demonstrates this; most of them can be paraphrased in
one or two words; “leopard,” “I’m angry,” and so on. Similarly, an
infant’s first words are at the monkey-call level of generalization,
not the whole sentence in a word that Arbib imagines. Arbib’s sug-
gestion would require that super-words and the capacity to de-

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

129

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

velop and use them evolved, then disappeared again in favor of the
more specific words that characterize all existing languages. All
this would have had to occur before speaking hominids gave rise
to the present population, because the generality of words is about
the  same  in  all  languages  and  therefore  probably  constitutes  a
“universal” of language, that is, a species-specific and possibly a
part of our biological language equipment.

One-word  phrases  address  one  of  the  paradoxes  of  language
evolution: in order to create a selective pressure for evolution of
better capability in using grammar, there must be a preexisting,
culturally defined lexicon with which the grammar can be built.
Many of the words used in modern languages could appear in this
way, but others, especially modifiers such as tense markers, can-
not. At this stage, words name things. The thing can be an object
(later, noun), an action (verb), or a property (adjective/adverb).
Again, the paradox is the same: that such modifiers would have to
exist already before a complex grammar could develop.

How could the sorts of words that cannot be used alone get
invented? Again we have evidence from the development of lan-
guage  in  children.  True,  a  child’s  first  words  are  single  “holo-
phrase” utterances, often comprehensible only in a context. But
next comes a two-word slot grammar, the same all over the world
regardless of the structure of the parent language. This suggests a
biologically prepared mechanism (reviewed in Bridgeman 2003,
Ch. 7). Culturally, a large lexicon could develop at this stage, more
complex than one-word phrases could support, making possible
and useful the further development of grammar.

Though the slot grammar of toddlers is different from that of
the child’s eventual language, it has several properties that make
it useful for developing structure in a lexicon. Single-word utter-
ances  need  not  differentiate  parts  of  speech,  since  there  is  no
grammar. Words such as “sour” and “fruit” would be parallel – de-
scriptions of some property of the world. Only when combined
with another word must they be differentiated. Most of the utter-
ances of the slot grammar consist of a noun and a modifier, either
an adjective or a verb, that qualifies the context of the noun.

A “language” such as this is severely limited. We can imagine
some group of Homo erectus sitting around their fire after a hard
day of hunting and gathering. Someone announces, “Lake cold.”
Another replies, “Fishing good.” The results seem almost comical
to us, but such terms would be tremendously more useful than no
language at all, because they allow the huge advantage that hu-
mans have over other living primates – to allow the experience of
one individual to increase the knowledge of another. Once this
level of communication is achieved, the selective pressure would
be tremendous to develop all the power and subtlety of modern
language.

Sign languages are problematic for a gestural
origins theory of language evolution

Karen Emmorey
Laboratory for Cognitive Neuroscience, The Salk Institute for Biological
Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037. emmorey@salk.edu
http://www-psy.ucsd.edu:80/~kemmorey

Abstract: Sign languages exhibit all the complexities and evolutionary ad-
vantages of spoken languages. Consequently, sign languages are problem-
atic for a theory of language evolution that assumes a gestural origin. There
are no compelling arguments why the expanding spiral between protosign
and protospeech proposed by Arbib would not have resulted in the evolu-
tionary dominance of sign over speech.

At first glance, the existence of modern sign languages provides
support for Arbib’s hypothesis that there was an early stage in the
evolution  of  language  in  which  communication  was  predomi-
nantly gestural. Modern sign languages offer insight into how pan-
tomimic  communication  might  have  evolved  into  a  more  lan-

130

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

guage-like system (i.e., protosign). Diachronic linguistic analyses
have traced grammaticalization pathways in American Sign Lan-
guage (ASL) that originate with gesture (Janzen & Shaffer 2002).
For example, grammatical markers of modality in ASL (e.g., “can,”
“must”) are derived from lexical signs (“strong,” “owe”), and these
lexical signs are in turn derived from nonlinguistic communicative
gestures  (clenching  the  fists  and  flexing  muscles  to  indicate
strength and a deictic pointing gesture indicating monetary debt).
Investigations of newly emerging signed languages are also un-
covering patterns of conventionalization and grammaticalization
that originate in pantomimic and communicative gestures (e.g.,
Kegl et al. 1999). Of course, these are modern sign languages ac-
quired and created by modern human brains, but the evidence in-
dicates that communicative gestures can evolve into language.

Arbib reasonably proposes that the transition from gesture to
speech was not abrupt, and he suggests that protosign and proto-
speech  developed  in  an  expanding  spiral  until  protospeech  be-
came dominant for most people. However, there is no evidence
that protosign ever became dominant for any subset of people –
except  for  those  born  deaf.  The  only  modern  communities  in
which  a  signed  language  is  dominant  have  deaf  members  for
whom a spoken language cannot be acquired naturally. No known
community  of  hearing  people  (without  deaf  members)  uses  a
signed language as the primary language. Hence, a community of
deaf people appears to be a prerequisite for the emergence and
maintenance of a sign language. Although it is possible that a sign
language (and its deaf community) has existed for 6,000 years (the
divergence date for Indo-European spoken languages), the earli-
est known sign language can be tentatively traced back only 500
years to the use of Turkish Sign Language at the Ottoman court
(Zeshan 2003).

The fact that signed languages appear to be relatively new lan-
guages does not mean that they are somehow inferior to spoken
languages. Signed languages are just as complex, just as efficient,
and just as useful as spoken languages. Signed languages easily ex-
press abstract concepts, are acquired similarly by children, and are
processed by the same neural systems within the left hemisphere
(see Emmorey 2002 for review). Thus, in principle, there is no lin-
guistic reason why the expanding spiral between protosign and
protospeech  could  not  have  resulted  in  the  evolutionary  domi-
nance of sign over speech. A gestural-origins theory must explain
why speech evolved at all, particularly when choking to death is a
potential by-product of speech evolution due to the repositioning
of the larynx.

Corballis  (2002)  presents  several  specific  hypotheses  why
speech might have won out over gesture, but none are satisfactory
(at least to my mind). Corballis suggests that speech may have an
advantage because more arbitrary symbols are used, but sign lan-
guages also consist of arbitrary symbols, and there is no evidence
that the iconicity of some signs limits expression or processing.
The problem of signing in the dark is another oft-cited disadvan-
tage  for  sign  language.  However,  early  signers/gesturers  could
sign in moonlight or firelight, and a tactile version of sign language
could even be used if it were pitch black (i.e., gestures/signs are
felt).  Furthermore,  speech  has  the  disadvantage  of  attracting
predators  with  sound  at  night  or  alerting  prey  during  a  hunt. 
Corballis  argues  that  speech  would  allow  for  communication
simultaneously with manual activities, such as tool construction or
demonstration.  However,  signers  routinely  sign  with  one  hand,
while the other hand holds or manipulates an object (e.g., turning
the steering wheel while driving and signing to a passenger). It is
true that operation of a tool that requires two hands would neces-
sitate  serial  manual  activity,  interspersing  gesturing  with  object
manipulation. But no deaths have occurred from serial manual ac-
tivity, unlike the deaths that occur as a result of choking.

Everyone agrees that the emergence of language had clear and
compelling evolutionary advantages. Presumably, it was these ad-
vantages that outweighed the dangerous change in the vocal tract
that  allowed  for  human  speech  but  increased  the  likelihood  of
choking.  If  communicative  pantomime  and  protosign  preceded

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

protospeech, it is not clear why protosign simply did not evolve
into sign language. The evolutionary advantage of language would
already be within the grasp of early humans.

Biological evolution of cognition and culture:
Off Arbib’s mirror-neuron system stage?

Horacio Fabrega, Jr.
Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213.
hfabregajr@adelphia.net

Abstract: Arbib offers a comprehensive, elegant formulation of brain/lan-
guage evolution; with significant implications for social as well as biologi-
cal sciences. Important psychological antecedents and later correlates are
presupposed; their conceptual enrichment through protosign and proto-
speech is abbreviated in favor of practical communication. What culture
“is” and whether protosign and protospeech involve a protoculture are not
considered. Arbib also avoids dealing with the question of evolution of
mind, consciousness, and self.

Is the mirror-neuron system (MNS) purely for grasping a basis for
or a consequence of social communication and organization? Ar-
bib suggests that even monkey MNS (involving praxis and vocal-
ization) contains the seeds of or serves “real” communication func-
tions, as does simple imitation (but how?), with respect to social
cooperation and ecological problem-solving. Such functions are
easier to visualize for emotional and facial gestures than for grasp-
ing per se (on which he places most emphasis).

Arbib’s formulation of what a pantomime sequence might com-
municate presupposes enormous cognitive capacities. Much of so-
cial cognition, conscious awareness of self and situation, and goal-
setting appear already resonant in the brain before pantomime.
Some have attributed self-consciousness and the “aboutness rela-
tionship” to language (Macphail 2000), but Arbib posits that the
reverse occurs.

In Arbib’s Table 1, cognitive functions (LR5) are said to precede
all of language readiness: This involves a primate being able to
take in, decompose, and order a complex perceptual scene as per
an action. Yet how this capacity blends into LR1–LR4 is covered
mainly in brain terms, with natural selection (behavioral) factors
minimized. It is unclear to what extent the idea that much of cog-
nition precedes and gets recruited into language readiness differs
from formulations of others who cover related topics and whose
work is not discussed in detail, such as Deacon (1997), Greenfield
(1991),  Jackendoff’s  (1983)  and  Wilkins  and  Wakefield’s  (1995)
conceptual structure, the latter’s POT (parieto-occipito-temporo
junction), McNeilage’s (1998) syllabification, and metacommuni-
cation and autoneoesis (Suddendorf 1999; Suddendorf & Corbal-
lis 1997; Wheeler et al. 1997).

The biological line between LR and L (language) is left open:
How much of the protosign/protospeech spiral is enough? Arbib
promotes a slow, gradual evolution of LR and L as per communi-
cation but handles these as purely in analytical terms, as arbitrar-
ily discontinuous. Despite much work on human speciation events
(Crow 2002b), Arbib seems against it. He is vague on “what of”
and “how much of” spiraling establishes speciation, the identity of
Homo sapiens. Is the latter “merely” a cultural event? Arbib sug-
gests that a member of Homo erectus has the capacity to mentally
use  and  associate  symbols  that  are  arbitrary  and  abstract  (i.e.,
showing considerable culture and cognition) yet is able to produce
only simple, unitary utterances (showing comparatively little lan-
guage). This renders ambiguous exactly what marks speciation:
Does it come “only” when full language is invented or does is re-
quire more cognition and culture (and how much more?) made
possible by invention of language as we know it? Behavioral im-
plications of the cognitive/brain jump between simple imitation
and complex imitation are also not clearly spelled out. Expressing
relationships (compositionally) is said to come later, yet is analo-

gous capacity not perceptually, cognitively inherent even before
complex imitation? Exactly how LR differs from simple imitation
behaviorally and in terms of the brain is not clear.

Arbib relies on Tomasello’s (1999a) idea about the biological ca-
pacity for intentional communication and social learning/culture,
all inherent in Homo sapiens (i.e., with language), yet includes in-
tended communication as part of protolanguage and hence “pre-
human.” Shared attributes of awareness of self as agent/sender
and conspecific as receiver, adding parity and symbolization to this
amalgam, are implied. Does this mean that Homo sapiens’ lan-
guage-ready brain already enabled self-awareness, self/other dif-
ferentiation, and social cognition well before its members could
actually “do” language? Arbib suggests that culture involves late
happenings (Pfeiffer 1982). Does not something like protoculture
(Hallowell 1960) accompany LR as the “spiral” begins and gets un-
der way? Arbib also suggests that much of the protosign/proto-
speech had a learned (cultural?) basis. Behavioral and cognitive
implications of Arbib’s Language Readiness construct (LR) are
abstract and unclear. It (LR) appears to incorporate ordinary eco-
logic, executive cognition as well as social cognition, and it is un-
clear how language fits in these. Much of social and executive
cognition is collapsed into, seems entailed by, LR schema. What
exactly language adds to aspects of self-awareness/consciousness
and social cognition is not clear. Fundamental questions of the re-
lation between language and thought are simply bypassed (Car-
ruthers & Boucher 1998).

It is a challenging and very controversial idea that language is a
purely cultural achievement – that it was invented and then per-
fected and remained as a cultural innovation ready for an infant
born into a language/culture community to just learn naturally. It
is difficult to understand how the articulatory, phonological equip-
ment for language evolved entirely during the pre–Homo sapiens
LR phase; complexities of speech production seem in excess of
what the protosign/protospeech spiraling entails, unless one in-
cludes more of language within LR.

Arbib’s discussion of LA3 in section 2.2 is stunning: if one re-
moved syntax (how much of it? Arbib mentions only time order-
ing and numbering system) one would still have language rather
than a protolanguage (Bickerton 1995). Arbib does elaborate on
this as per time travel but relates it to a whole array of brain/cog-
nition features that support LR6. Is time travel inherent in pro-
tolanguage but only used through language? He also suggests that
language involves the capacity to exploit these cognitive structures
for communication purposes, suggesting that emergence/design
of cognitive structures did not have a communicative basis. Did
protosign/protospeech  spiraling  merely  have  communicational
basic functions? This relates to complex language/thought ques-
tions which Arbib bypasses.

Why MNS may not have involved vocality along with praxic/
gestural features from the start without necessitating a detour of
gesture  alone  is  not  clear.  What  brain/genetic  conditions  were
“not in place” that precluded the use of vocality along with man-
ual gesture and that only later made it possible? Arbib’s two an-
swers to this conundrum are not entirely persuasive.

The  conventionalized  gestures  used  to  disambiguate  pan-
tomime constitute a major transition into protosign, involving a
dissociation between the mirror production system and the recog-
nition system, but this is dealt with by (merely) introducing the hy-
pothesis  of  intended  communication,  bypassing  problems  dis-
cussed earlier.

Epilogue: The mirror system as a framework for the evolution
of  culture. Intellectual  quandaries  hover  over  the  evolutionary,
brain, and social sciences: the nature of consciousness, self-con-
sciousness,  psychological  experience,  cultural  knowledge,  and
selfhood. To understand all of these in terms of brain function, and
to bring into this intellectual theater their human evolutionary ba-
sis,  makes  for  a  very  beclouded  stage.  Many  researchers  have
glided over such questions (Damasio 1987; D’Andrade 1999; In-
gold 1996; Wierzbicka 1992; 1993). Some have addressed them in
piecemeal fashion (Barkow 1987; Bickerton 1995; Geertz 1973;

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

131

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

Noble & Davidson 1996). Mind, consciousness, and, especially,
capacity for and realization of culture constitute, at least in part,
neuroanatomical and neurophysiological phenomena. As the ho-
minid brain evolved, episodic and, especially, semantic memory
contained material that was fed into a working memory bin or
supervisory system providing basis for experience and (autobio-
graphical?)  selfhood  (Baddeley  1986;  Fuster  2002;  Tononi  &
Edelman 1998; Shallice 1988).

When evolutionary scientists address such topics, they focus on
concrete, expedient, raw, or “brutish” fitness imperatives, involv-
ing such things as hunting, foraging, mating, or parenting (Wray
1998;  2000),  leaving  out  cultural,  symbolic,  ritual  complexities
(Fabrega 1997; 2002; 2004; Knight 1991). Arbib has managed to
touch on all of these matters implicitly and tangentially, but for the
most part leaves them off his MNS stage.

Beginning  with  the  language-readiness  phases  wherein  in-
tended communication is explicitly manifest, particularly during
the shift from imitation to (conscious use of) protosign, then to
protospeech, and finally to language, Arbib insinuates (and once
mentions) culture/community and implies a sense of shared social
life and social history. If there is a shared body of knowledge about
what pantomimes are for and what they mean, what disambiguat-
ing gestures are for and mean, and what speech sounds are for and
mean, then there exists an obvious meaning-filled thought-world
or context “carried in the mind” that encompasses self-awareness,
other-awareness, need for cooperation, capacity for perspective-
taking – and, presumably, a shared framework of what existence,
subsistence, mating, parenting, helping, competing, and the like
entail and what they mean. All of this implies that evolution of cul-
ture “happened” or originated during phases of biological evolution
as LR capacities came into prominence (Foley 2001). No one de-
nies that “culture” was evident at 40,000 b.c.e., yet virtually no one
ventures to consider “culture” prior to this “explosion.” Arbib im-
plies, along with Wray (1998; 2000) that the context of language evo-
lution was dominated by purely practical, expedient considerations
(e.g., getting things done, preserving social stability, greetings, re-
quests, threats). Boyer (1994) and Atran and Norenzayan (2004)
imply that as a human form of cognition “coalesced,” so did a sig-
nificant component of culture (Fabrega 1997; 2002; 2004). Arbib’s
formulation suggests culture “got started” well before this, perhaps,
as he implies, with Homo habilis and certainly Homo erectus.

Protomusic and protolanguage as
alternatives to protosign

W. Tecumseh Fitch
School of Psychology, University of St. Andrews, Fife KY16 9JP, Scotland.
wtsf@st-andrews.ac.uk

Abstract: Explaining the transition from a signed to a spoken protolan-
guage is a major problem for all gestural theories. I suggest that Arbib’s
improved “beyond the mirror” hypothesis still leaves this core problem un-
solved, and that Darwin’s model of musical protolanguage provides a more
compelling solution. Second, although I support Arbib’s analytic theory of
language origin, his claim that this transition is purely cultural seems un-
likely, given its early, robust development in children.

Arbib’s wide-ranging paper commendably weaves together multi-
ple threads from neuroscience, linguistics, and ethology, provid-
ing an explicit, plausible model for language phylogeny, starting
with our common ancestor with other primates and ending with
modern  language-ready  Homo  sapiens.  He  takes  seriously  the
comparative data accrued over the last 40 years of primatology,
rightly rejecting any simple transition from “monkey calls to lan-
guage,” and provides an excellent integrative overview of an im-
portant body of neuroscientific data on grasping and vision and
their interaction. I agree with Arbib’s suggestion that some type of
“protolanguage” is a necessary stage in language evolution, and

132

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

that the term should not be limited to any particular model of proto-
language (e.g., Bickerton’s [1995] model). However, I suggest that
the relevance of monkey mirror neurons to gestural theories of lan-
guage evolution has been overstated, and I will focus on weaknesses
Arbib’s model faces in explaining two key transitions: protosign to
protospeech, and holistic protolanguage to syntactic language.

The chain of a logical argument is only as strong as its weakest
link. The weak link in Arbib’s model is the crucial leap from proto-
sign to protospeech, specifically his elision between two distinct
forms of imitation: vocal and manual. Comparative data suggest
that these two are by no means inevitably linked. Although dol-
phins  are  accomplished  at  both  whole-body  and  vocal  imitation
(Reiss & McCowan 1993; Richards et al. 1984), and parrots can im-
itate movements (Moore 1992), evidence for non-vocal imitation
in the largest group of vocal imitators, the songbirds, is tenuous at
best (Weydemeyer 1930). Apes exhibit the opposite dissociation
between some manual proto-imitation with virtually no vocal imi-
tation. There is therefore little reason to assume that the evolution
of manual imitation and protosign would inevitably “scaffold” vo-
cal imitation. Realizing this, Arbib offers a neuroanatomical justi-
fication  for  this  crucial  link,  suggesting  that  the  hypertrophied
manual mirror system supporting protosign “colonized” the neigh-
boring vocal areas of F5 by a process of “collateralization.”

However, the key difference between human and other primate
brains is not limited to local circuitry in area F5 but includes long-
distance corticomotor connections from (pre)motor cortex to au-
ditory motor neurons in the brainstem, which exist in humans but
not other primates (Jürgens 1998). These probably represent a
crucial neural step in gaining the voluntary control over vocaliza-
tion differentiating humans from monkeys and apes. “Collateral-
ization” is not enough to create such corticomotor connections.
Indeed, given competition for cortical real estate in the develop-
ing brain, it would seem, if anything, to make their survival less
likely. Thus, like other versions of gestural origins hypotheses, Ar-
bib’s model fails to adequately explain how a “protosign” system
can truly scaffold the ability for vocal learning that spoken lan-
guage rests upon. Are there alternatives?

Darwin suggested that our prelinguistic ancestors possessed an
intermediate “protolanguage” that was more musical than linguis-
tic  (Darwin  1871).  Combining  Darwin’s  idea  with  the  “holistic
protolanguage” arguments given by Arbib and others (Wray 2002a),
and the “mimetic stage” hypothesized by (Donald 1993), gives a
rather different perspective on the co-evolution of vocal and man-
ual gesture, tied more closely to music and dance than pantomime
and linguistic communication. By this hypothesis, the crucial first
step in human evolution from our last common ancestor with chim-
panzees was the development of vocal imitation, similar in form and
function to that independently evolved in many other vertebrate
lineages (including cetaceans, pinnipeds, and multiple avian lin-
eages). This augmented the already-present movement display be-
haviour seen in modern chimpanzees and gorillas to form a novel,
learned, and open-ended multimodal display system. This hypo-
thetical musical protolanguage preceded any truly linguistic system
capable of communicating particulate, propositional meanings.

This hypothesis is equally able to explain the existence of sign
(via the dance/music linkage), makes equal use of the continuity
between ape and human gesture, and can inherit all of Arbib’s “ex-
panding spiral” arguments. But it replaces the weakest link in Ar-
bib’s logical chain (the scaffolding of vocal by manual imitation)
with a step that appears to evolve rather easily: the early evolution
of a vocally imitating “singing ape” (where vocal learning functions
in enhancement of multimodal displays). It renders understand-
able why all modern human cultures choose speech over sign as
the linguistic medium, if this sensory-motor channel is available.
It also explains, “for free,” the evolution of two nonlinguistic hu-
man universals, dance and music, as “living fossils” of an earlier
stage of human communicative behaviour. We need posit no hy-
pothetical or marginal protolanguage: evidence of a human-spe-
cific music/dance communication system is as abundant as one
could desire. There are abundant testable empirical predictions

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

that would allow us to discriminate between this and Arbib’s hy-
potheses; the key desideratum is a better understanding of the
neural basis of human vocal imitation (now sorely lacking).

The second stage I find problematic in Arbib’s model is his expla-
nation of the move from holistic protolinguistic utterances to analytic
(fully linguistic) sentences. I agree that analytic models (which start
with  undecomposable  wholes)  are  more  plausible  than  synthetic
models (e.g., Bickerton 2003; Jackendoff 1999) from a comparative
viewpoint,  because  known  complex  animal  signals  map  signal  to
meaning holistically. Both analytic and synthetic theories must be
taken seriously, and their relative merits carefully examined. How-
ever, the robust early development of the ontogenetic “analytic in-
sight” in modern human children renders implausible the sugges-
tion that its basis is purely cultural, on a par with chess or calculus.
No other animal (including especially language-trained chim-
panzees or parrots) appears able to make this analytic leap, which
is  a  crucial  step  to  syntactic,  lexicalized  language.  While  dogs,
birds, and apes can learn to map between meanings and words
presented in isolation or in stereotyped sentence frames, the abil-
ity to extract words from arbitrary, complex contexts and to re-
combine them in equally complex, novel contexts is unattested in
any nonhuman animal. In vivid contrast, each generation of hu-
man children makes this “analytic leap” by the age of three, with-
out tutelage, feedback, or specific scaffolding. This is in striking
contrast to children’s acquisition of other cultural innovations such
as alphabetic writing, which occurred just once in human history
and still poses significant problems for many children, even with
long and detailed tutelage.

Although  the  first  behavioural  stages  in  the  transition  from
holistic  to  analytic  communication  were  probably  Baldwinian
exaptations, they must have been strongly and consistently shaped
by selection since that time, given the communicative and con-
ceptual advantages that a compositional, lexicalized language of-
fers. The “geniuses” making this analytic insight were not adults,
but children, learning and (over)generalizing about language un-
analyzed by their adult caretakers, and this behaviour must have
been powerfully selected, and genetically canalized, in recent hu-
man  evolution.  It  therefore  seems  strange  and  implausible  to
claim that the acquisition of the analytic ability had “little if any
impact on the human genome” (target article, sect. 2.3).

In conclusion, by offering an explicit phylogenetic hypothesis,
detailing each hypothetical protolinguistic stage and its mecha-
nistic underpinnings, and allowing few assumptions about these
stages to go unexamined, Arbib does a service to the field, goes be-
yond previous models, and raises the bar for all future theories of
language  phylogeny.  However,  further  progress  in  our  under-
standing of language evolution demands parallel consideration of
multiple plausible hypotheses, and finding empirical data to test
between them, on the model of physics or other natural sciences.
Arbib’s article is an important step in this direction.

Imitation systems, monkey vocalization, and
the human language

Emmanuel Gilissen
Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences, Anthropology and Prehistory,
B-1000 Brussels, Belgium. Emmanuel.Gilissen@naturalsciences.be
http://www.naturalsciences.be

Abstract: In offering a detailed view of putative steps towards the emer-
gence of language from a cognitive standpoint, Michael Arbib is also in-
troducing an evolutionary framework that can be used as a useful tool to
confront  other  viewpoints  on  language  evolution,  including  hypotheses
that emphasize possible alternatives to suggestions that language could not
have emerged from an earlier primate vocal communication system.

An essential aspect of the evolutionary framework presented by
Michael Arbib is that the system of language-related cortical ar-

eas evolved atop a system that already existed in nonhuman pri-
mates. As explained in the target article, crucial early stages of the
progression towards a language-ready brain are the mirror system
for grasping and its extension to permit imitation.

When  comparing  vocal-acoustic  systems  in  vertebrates,  neu-
roanatomical and neurophysiological studies reveal that such sys-
tems extend from forebrain to hindbrain levels and that many of
their organizational features are shared by distantly related verte-
brate taxa such as teleost fish, birds, and mammals (Bass & Baker
1997; Bass & McKibben 2003; Goodson & Bass 2002). Given this
fundamental  homogeneity,  how  are  documented  evolutionary
stages comparable to imitation in vertebrate taxa? Vocal imitation
is a type of higher-level vocal behaviour that is, for instance, illus-
trated by the songs of humpback whales (Payne & Payne 1985).
In this case, there is not only voluntary control over the imitation
process of a supposedly innate vocal pattern, but also a voluntary
control over the acoustic structure of the pattern.

This behaviour seems to go beyond “simple” imitation of “ob-
ject-oriented” sequences and resembles a more complex imitation
system. Although common in birds, this level of vocal behaviour is
only rarely found in mammals (Jürgens 2002). It “evolved atop”
preexisting systems, therefore paralleling emergence of language
in humans. It indeed seems that this vocalization-based communi-
cation system is breaking through a fixed repertoire of vocalizations
to yield an open repertoire, something comparable to protosign
stage (S5). Following Arbib, S5 is the second of the three stages
that distinguish the hominid lineage from that of the great apes.
Although the specific aspect of S5 is to involve a manual-based
communication system, it is interesting to see how cetaceans of-
fer striking examples of convergence with the hominid lineage in
higher-level complex cognitive characteristics (Marino 2002).

The emergence of a manual-based communication system that
broke through a fixed repertoire of primate vocalizations seems to
owe little to nonhuman primate vocalizations. Speech is indeed a
learned motor pattern, and even if vocal communication systems
such as the ones of New World monkeys represent some of the
most  sophisticated  vocal  systems  found  in  nonhuman  primates
(Snowdon  1989),  monkey  calls  cannot  be  used  as  models  for
speech  production  because  they  are  genetically  determined  in
their  acoustic  structure.  As  a  consequence,  a  number  of  brain
structures crucial for the production of learned motor patterns
such as speech production are dispensable for the production of
monkey calls (Jürgens 1998).

There is, however, one aspect of human vocal behavior that does
resemble monkey calls in that it also bears a strong genetic compo-
nent. This aspect involves emotional intonations that are super-
imposed on the verbal component. Monkey calls can therefore be
considered as an interesting model for investigating the central
mechanisms underlying emotional vocal expression (Jürgens 1998).
In recent studies, Falk (2004a; 2004b) hypothesizes that as hu-
man  infants  develop,  a  special  form  of  infant-directed  speech
known as baby talk or motherese universally provides a scaffold
for their eventual acquisition of language. Human babies cry in or-
der to re-establish physical contact with caregivers, and human
mothers engage in motherese that functions to soothe, calm, and
reassure infants. These special vocalizations are in marked con-
trast to the relatively silent mother/infant interactions that char-
acterize  living  chimpanzees  (and  presumably  their  ancestors).
Motherese is therefore hypothesized to have evolved in early ho-
minin  mother/infant  pairs,  and  to  have  formed  an  important
prelinguistic  substrate  from  which  protolanguage  eventually
emerged. Although we cannot demonstrate whether there is a link
between monkey calls and motherese, it appears that the neural
substrate  for  emotional  coding,  prosody,  and  intonation,  and
hence for essential aspects of motherese content, is largely pre-
sent in nonhuman primate phonation circuitry (Ploog 1988; Sut-
ton & Jürgens 1988). In a related view, Deacon (1989) suggested
that the vocalization circuits that play a central role in nonhuman
primate vocalization became integrated into the more distributed
human language circuits.

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

133

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

Although the view of Falk puts language emergence in a con-
tinuum that is closer to primate vocal communication than the
framework of Michael Arbib, both models involve a progression
atop the systems already preexisting in nonhuman primates. Ar-
bib’s work gives the first detailed account of putative evolutionary
stages in the emergence of human language from a cognitive view-
point. It therefore could be used as a framework to test specific
links between cognitive human language and communicative hu-
man language emergence hypotheses, such as the one recently
proposed by Falk.

Auditory object processing and primate
biological evolution

Barry Horwitz,a Fatima T. Husain,a and Frank H. Guentherb
aBrain Imaging and Modeling Section, National Institute on Deafness and
Other Communications Disorders, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD 20892; bDepartment of Cognitive and Neural Systems, Boston University,
Boston, MA 02215. horwitz@helix.nih.gov
http://www.nidcd.nih.gov/research/scientists/horwitzb.asp
guenther@cns.bu.edu

http://www.cns.bu.edu/~guenther/

husainf@nidcd.nih.gov

Abstract: This commentary focuses on the importance of auditory object
processing for producing and comprehending human language, the rela-
tive lack of development of this capability in nonhuman primates, and the
consequent need for hominid neurobiological evolution to enhance this
capability in making the transition from protosign to protospeech to lan-
guage.

The target article by Arbib provides a cogent but highly speculative
proposal concerning the crucial steps in recent primate evolution
that led to the development of human language. Generally, much
of what Arbib proposes concerning the transition from the mirror
neuron system to protosign seems plausible, and he makes numer-
ous points that are important when thinking about language evolu-
tion. We especially applaud his use of neural modeling to imple-
ment specific hypotheses about the neural mechanisms mediating
the mirror neuron system. We also think his discussion in section 6
of  the  necessity  to  use  protosign  as  scaffolding  upon  which  to
ground symbolic auditory gestures in protospeech is a significant in-
sight. However, the relatively brief attention Arbib devotes to the
perception side of language, and specifically to the auditory aspects
of this perception, seems to us to be a critical oversight. The explicit
assumption  that  protosign  developed  before  protospeech,  rein-
forced by the existence of sign language as a fully developed lan-
guage, allows Arbib (and others) to ignore some of the crucial fea-
tures  that  both  the  productive  and  receptive  aspects  of  speech
require in terms of a newly evolved neurobiological architecture.

One aspect of auditory processing that merits attention, but is
not examined by Arbib, has to do with auditory object processing.
By auditory object, we mean a delimited acoustic pattern that is
subject  to  figure-ground  separation  (Kubovy  &  Van  Valkenburg
2001). Humans are interested in a huge number of such objects (in
the form of words, melodic fragments, important environmental
sounds), perhaps numbering on the order of 105 in an individual.
However, it is difficult to train monkeys on auditory object tasks,
and the number of auditory objects that interest them, compared
to visual objects, seems small, numbering perhaps in the hundreds
(e.g., some species-specific calls, some important environmental
sounds). For example, Mishkin and collaborators (Fritz et al. 1999;
Saunders et al. 1998) have showed that monkeys with lesions in the
medial temporal lobe (i.e., entorhinal and perirhinal cortex) are im-
paired relative to unlesioned monkeys in their ability to perform
correctly a visual delayed match-to-sample task when the delay pe-
riod is long, whereas both lesioned and unlesioned monkeys are
equally unable to perform such a task using auditory stimuli.

These results implicate differences in monkeys between vision
and audition in the use of long-term memory for objects. Our view

134

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

is that a significant change occurred in biological evolution allowing
hominids to develop the ability to discriminate auditory objects, to
categorize them, to retain them in long-term memory, to manipu-
late them in working memory, and to relate them to articulatory ges-
tures. It is only the last of these features that Arbib discusses. In our
view, the neural basis of auditory object processing will prove to be
central to understanding human language evolution. We have be-
gun a systematic approach combining neural modeling with neuro-
physiological  and  functional  brain  imaging  data  to  explore  the
neural substrates for this type of processing (Husain et al. 2004).

Concerning language production, Arbib’s model of the mirror-
neuron system (MNS) may require considerable modification, es-
pecially  when  the  focus  shifts  to  the  auditory  modality.  For  in-
stance,  there  is  no  treatment  of  babbling,  which  occurs  in  the
development of both spoken and sign languages (Petitto & Mar-
entette 1991). Underscoring the importance of auditory processing
in human evolution, hearing-impaired infants exhibit vocal bab-
bling that declines with time (Stoel-Gammon & Otomo 1986).

However, there has been work in developing biologically plau-
sible models of speech acquisition and production. In one such
model (Guenther 1995), a role for the MNS in learning motor
commands for producing speech sounds has been posited. Prior
to developing the ability to generate speech sounds, an infant must
learn what sounds to produce by processing sound examples from
the native language. That is, he or she must learn an auditory tar-
get for each native language sound. This occurs in the model via a
MNS  involving  speech  sound-map  cells  hypothesized  to  corre-
spond to mirror neurons (Guenther & Ghosh 2003). Only after
learning this auditory target can the model learn the appropriate
motor commands for producing the sound via a combination of
feedback  and  feed-forward  control  subsystems.  After  the  com-
mands are learned, the same speech sound-map cell can be acti-
vated to read out the motor commands for producing the sound.
In this way, mirror neurons in the model play an important role in
both the acquisition of speaking skills and in subsequent speech
production in the tuned system. This role of mirror neurons in de-
velopment of new motor skills differs from Arbib’s MNS model,
which “makes the crucial assumption that the grasps that the mir-
ror system comes to recognize are already in the (monkey or hu-
man) infant’s repertoire” (sect. 3.2, para. 7).

Our efforts to comprehend the biological basis of language evo-
lution will, by necessity, depend on understanding the neural sub-
strates  for  human  language  processing,  which  in  turn  will  rely
heavily  on  comparative  analyses  with  nonhuman  primate  neu-
robiology. All these points are found in Arbib’s target article. A 
crucial aspect, which Arbib invokes, is the necessary reliance on
neurobiologically realistic neural modeling to generate actual im-
plementations of neurally based hypotheses that can be tested by
comparing simulated data to human and nonhuman primate ex-
perimental data (Horwitz 2005). It seems to us that the fact that
humans use audition as the primary medium for language expres-
sion means that auditory neurobiology is a crucial component that
must be incorporated into hypotheses about how we must go be-
yond the mirror-neuron system.

On the neural grounding for metaphor and
projection

Bipin Indurkhya
International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad 500 019, India.
bipin@iiit.net

Abstract: Focusing on the mirror system and imitation, I examine the role
of metaphor and projection in evolutionary neurolinguistics. I suggest that
the key to language evolution in hominid might be an ability to project one’s
thoughts and feelings onto another agent or object, to see and feel things
from another perspective, and to be able to empathize with another agent.

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

With regard to the evolutionary framework for neurolinguistics
spelled out in Arbib’s article, I would like to focus on the role of
metaphor and projection therein. In particular, I am interested in
the implications of Arbib’s framework for the thesis “all knowledge
(or language) is metaphorical.” It should be clarified from the out-
set that this thesis is sometimes misconstrued to suggest that the
literal or conventional does not exist – a suggestion that is trivially
refuted. However, the sense in which I take it here is based on a
well-known phenomenon that a novel metaphor sometimes be-
comes conventional through repeated use, and may even turn into
polysemy; and the claim is that all that is conventional and literal
now must have been metaphorical once (Indurkhya 1994). Fur-
thermore, I take the viewpoint that the key mechanism underly-
ing metaphor, especially creative metaphor, is that of projection,
which carves out a new ontology for the target of the metaphor
(Indurkhya 1992; 1998). This mechanism can be best explained as
projecting a structure onto a stimulus, as in gestalt interaction, and
is  to  be  contrasted  with  the  mapping-based  approaches  to
metaphor, which require a pre-existing ontology for mapping. For
example, in the context of Arbib’s article, it is the projection mech-
anism that determines what constitutes objects and actions when
a monkey watches a raisin being grasped by another monkey or by
a pair of pliers.

There are two particular places in the evolutionary account ar-
ticulated by Arbib where a projection step is implicit, and I shall
zoom in on them in turn to raise some open issues. The first of
these concerns the mirror neurons (sect. 3.2). Now, certain mir-
ror neurons are known to fire when a monkey observes another
monkey performing a particular grasping action but not when the
grasp is being performed with a tool. This suggests a predisposi-
tion towards the ontology of a biological effector. The interesting
question here is: How much variation can be introduced in the ef-
fector so that it is still acceptable to the mirror neuron. Does a ro-
bot arm trigger the mirror neuron? What about a hairy robot arm?
Similar remarks can be made with respect to the learning effect
in mirror neurons. When a monkey first sees a raisin being grasped
with a pair of pliers, then his mirror neurons do not fire. However,
after  many  such  experiences,  the  monkey’s  mirror  neurons  en-
coding  precision  grip  start  firing  when  he  sees  a  raisin  being
grasped with pliers. This shows a predisposition towards the on-
tology of the object raisin and the effect of grip on it, as it is not
the physical appearance of the effector but its effect on the object
that matters. Again we may ask how much variation is possible in
the object and the kind of grip before the mirror system fails to
learn. For example, after the mirror neurons learn to fire on see-
ing a raisin being grasped with pliers, do they also fire when tweez-
ers are used? Or, does the tweezers grasp have to be learned all
over again?

These issues become more prominent when we consider imita-
tion (sect. 4). In the literature, a wide range of animal behaviors
are  classified  as  imitation  (Caldwell  &  Whiten  2002;  Zentall  &
Akins 2001), and true imitation is distinguished from imprinting,
stimulus enhancement, emulation learning, and so on. However,
even in imitating a single action, one has to decide what aspect of
the situation to imitate, as any situation has many possible aspects;
and how to imitate, as the imitating agent has to interpret the sit-
uation from its point of view – it may not have the same effectors,
access to the same objects, and so on – and project the observed
action  into  its  own  action  repertoire  (Alissandrakis  et  al.  2002;
Hofstadter 1995). In this respect, studies on the behavior of ani-
mals that imitate a non-conspecific model, such as bottlenose dol-
phins or parrots imitating a human model (or a bottlenose dolphin
imitating  a  parrot?)  are  most  illuminating.  (See,  e.g.,  Bauer  &
Johnson 1994; Kuczaj et al. 1998; Moore 1992.) In Arbib’s frame-
work, a distinction is made between simple and complex imitation
to explain where humans diverge from monkeys, and a projection-
like mechanism is posited for complex imitation (sect. 2.1: LR1;
also sect. 5). But I would like to suggest that even simple imitation
could invoke projection, and the crux of the distinction between
humans and other animals might lie in the ability to interpret a

wider variety of actions and situations, and to project oneself into
those situations to imitate them in a number of ways.

Empathy – being able to put oneself into another’s shoes and to
project one’s thoughts and feelings into another person, animal, or
object – is often considered a hallmark of being human. Indeed,
one of the ideals of robotics research is to emulate this essentially
human trait in robots. (See, e.g., Breazeal et al. 2005; Kozima et
al. 2003. This is also the theme of the classic Philip K. Dick story
“Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?” upon which the popu-
lar film Blade Runner was based.) A glimpse of the key role played
by empathy in human cognition is provided by a study by Holstein
(1970), in which children were given projection tasks such as be-
ing asked to imagine being a doorknob or a rock, and to describe
one’s thoughts and feelings in order to stimulate their creativity.
In a very recent study, it was found that when participants hid one
of their hands and a rubber hand was placed in front of them to
make it look like their own hand, it took them only 11 seconds to
project their feelings onto the rubber hand as if it were their own,
down to the neural level: when the rubber hand was stroked by a
brush,  the  somatosensory  area  in  the  participants’  brain  corre-
sponding to their hand was stimulated (Ehrsson et al. 2004). One
wonders if monkeys and other animals are capable of projecting
their selves into other animals or other objects to this degree, and
if the divergent point of hominid evolution might not be found
therein.

Listen to my actions!

Jonas T. Kaplan and Marco Iacoboni
UCLA Brain Mapping Center, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095. jonask@ucla.edu
iacoboni@loni.ucla.edu

http://www.jonaskaplan.com

Abstract: We believe that an account of the role of mirror neurons in lan-
guage evolution should involve a greater emphasis on the auditory prop-
erties of these neurons. Mirror neurons in premotor cortex which respond
to the visual and auditory consequences of actions allow for a modality-in-
dependent  and  agent-independent  coding  of  actions,  which  may  have
been important for the emergence of language.

We agree with Arbib that the mirror property of some motor neu-
rons most probably played an important role in the evolution of
language. These neurons allow us to bridge the gap between two
minds, between perception and action. As strong evidence for the
role  of  mirror-like  mechanisms  in  language,  we  have  recently
demonstrated with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
that a human cortical area encompassing primary motor and pre-
motor cortex involved in the production of phonemes is also ac-
tive during the perception of those same phonemes (Wilson et al.
2004). This suggests that motor areas are recruited in speech per-
ception in a process of auditory-to-articulatory transformation that
accesses a phonetic code with motor properties (Liberman et al.
1967).

However, we direct our commentary mostly at what Arbib calls
the transition from protosign to protospeech. In Arbib’s account,
a system of iconic manual gestures evolved from a mirror system
of action recognition, and then somehow transitioned to a vocal-
based language. Mention is made of the so-called audiovisual mir-
ror neurons, which respond to the sound of an action as well as
during the production of that action (Kohler et al. 2002). The role
of these neurons in the evolution of language deserves more at-
tention.

Arbib argues that arbitrary signs first evolved in gesture, which
was more amenable to iconic representation, and that this proto-
sign provided the “scaffolding” for vocal-based abstractions. We
suggest  that  rather  than  being  added  on  later,  the  auditory  re-
sponsiveness of premotor neurons may have played a more cen-
tral role in the development of abstract representations. The au-

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

135

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

diovisual property of these mirror neurons puts them in position to
form a special kind of abstraction. Many of the neurons respond
equally well to the sight of an action and to the sound associated with
an action (Keysers et al. 2003). This means that they are represent-
ing an action not only regardless of who performs it, but also re-
gardless of the modality through which it is perceived. The multi-
modality of this kind of representation may have been an important
step towards the use of the motor system in symbolic language. Per-
formed and observed actions can be associated with both sounds
and sights. This makes the motor cortex a prime candidate as a po-
tential locus for the development of multimodal (or amodal) repre-
sentations, which are so important to language.

Support for this view comes from an fMRI study we recently con-
ducted on audiovisual interactions in the perception of actions (Ka-
plan & Iacoboni, submitted). When subjects saw and heard an ac-
tion (i.e., tearing paper) simultaneously, there was greater activity in
the left ventral premotor cortex compared with control conditions
in which they only saw or only heard the action. This cross-modal
interaction did not happen with a non-action control stimulus (i.e.,
a square moving while a sound was played), suggesting that the pre-
motor cortex is sensitive to the conjunction of visual and auditory
representations of an action. Again, it may be this capacity for con-
junctive representations that led to true symbolic capability.

Further support for the role of the auditory responsiveness of
motor  neurons  in  language  evolution  comes  from  transcranial
magnetic stimulation (TMS) studies on motor facilitation in the
two cerebral hemispheres in response to the sight or the sound of
an action. Motor activation to the sight of an action is typically bi-
lateral, albeit slightly larger in the left hemisphere in right-han-
ders (Aziz-Zadeh et al. 2002). Action sounds, in contrast, activate
the motor cortex only in the left hemisphere, the cerebral hemi-
sphere  dominant  for  language  (Aziz-Zadeh  et  al.  2004).  Since
there is no evidence of lateralized auditory responses of mirror
neurons in the monkey, the lateralization for action sounds ob-
served in the TMS study and the lateralization of cross-modal in-
teractions in the ventral premotor cortex seem to be related to
evolutionary processes that made human brain functions such as
language lateralized to the left hemisphere.

A more central role of auditory properties of mirror neurons in
language  evolution  makes  also  the  transition  from  manual  ges-
tures to mouth-based communication (speech) easier to account
for. Recent fMRI data suggest that the human premotor cortex
seems able to map some kind of articulatory representation onto
almost  any  acoustic  input  (Schubotz  &  von  Cramon  2003).  A
multi-sensory representation of action provided by mirror neu-
rons  responding  also  to  action  sounds  may  have  more  easily
evolved  in  articulatory  representation  of  the  sounds  associated
with manual actions.

In summary, it may be the premotor cortex’s unique position of
having both cross-modal and cross-agent information that allowed
it to support language. The auditory properties of mirror neurons
may have been a facilitator rather than a by-product of language
evolution.

Pragmatics, prosody, and evolution:
Language is more than a symbolic system

Boris Kotchoubey
Institute of Medical Psychology and Behavioral Neurobiology, University of
Tübingen, 72074 Tübingen, Germany.
boris.kotchoubey@uni-tuebingen.de
http://www.uni-tuebingen.de/medizinischepsychologie/stuff/

Abstract: The model presented in the target article is biased towards a
cognitive-symbolic understanding of language, thus ignoring its other im-
portant aspects. Possible relationships of this cognitive-symbolic subsys-
tem to pragmatics and prosody of language are discussed in the first part
of the commentary. In the second part, the issue of a purely social versus

136

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

biological mechanisms for transition from protolanguage to properly lan-
guage is considered

1. Arbib’s conception of language, summarised in LA1 to LA4,
is concentrated upon its cognitive components and the cognitive
abilities that both underlie and are based on verbal communica-
tion. Although semantics and syntax are the only components of
the  language  in  highly  intelligent  speaking  robots,  human  lan-
guages also include expressive components such as intonation and
gesticulation. Particularly, prosody subserves two important func-
tions of emotional expression (affective prosody) and of clarifica-
tion of the content’s meaning (linguistic prosody, such as distin-
guishing  between  an  assertion  and  a  question)  (Bostanov  &
Kotchoubey 2004; Seddoh 2002). Neuropsychological and neu-
roimaging data converge in demonstrating that both linguistic and
affective  prosodic  information  is  processed  mainly  in  the  right
temporal lobe (Ross 1981), in contrast to semantics and syntax,
which are processed in the left temporal lobe. Affective prosody
is strikingly similar in humans and other primates, so that human
subjects having no previous experience with monkeys correctly
identify the emotional content of their screams (Linnankoski et al.
1994).

It is therefore tempting to represent the system of language as
entailing two virtually additive subsystems. The left hemispheric
subsystem develops on the basis of the mirror system of apes in 
an indirect way depicted in the target article, and subserves the
cognitive-symbolic function of language, its referential network,
and syntactic design. The right hemispheric subsystem, in con-
trast, is a direct successor of monkeys’ vocalisation mechanisms
and  gives  our  language  its  intonational  colour  and  expressive
power (Scherer 1986).

This view would ignore, however, the possibly most important
aspect of language: its pragmatics. Except for some scientific dis-
cussions, which did not play any important role before 2,500 years
ago (and even after this point their role should not be overesti-
mated),  communication  is  directed  to  move  somebody  to  do
something. Communication is only a means, whereas the goal is
co-operation.1 The pragmatic function of language goes beyond
the mere referential semantics and mere expression of one’s own
state: It links together verbal and non-verbal, symbolic and non-
symbolic components of language because it relates us, over all
conventional symbols (words), to some, perhaps very remote, non-
conventional  basis.  Likewise,  affective  prosody  is  not  symbolic 
and conventional; it is a part of emotion itself. This pragmatic view
makes it very difficult to imagine a certain moment in the evolu-
tion of language when its left- and right-hemispheric components
met  together;  rather,  they  should  have  been  together  from  the
very beginning.

Some recent neuropsychological data point in the same direc-
tion. Although the right temporal lobe is critical for recognition of
prosody (Adolphs et al. 2002), prosodic aspects of language are
also severely impaired in patients with lesions to orbitofrontal cor-
tex (Hornak et al. 2003) and the corpus callosum (Friederici et al.
2003). All this makes the simple additive model (i.e., the ancient
prosodic subsystem is simply added to the newly developed cog-
nitive  subsystem)  implausible.  Rather,  a  theory  is  needed  that
would describe the development of language in mutual interac-
tion of its different aspects.

2. Arbib suggests that the development of language from pro-
tolanguage was a social rather than biological process. The only
mechanism of such social progress he describes in section 7 is the
unexpected and unpredictable linguistic inventions made by nu-
merous but anonymous genii, those inventions being then seized
upon and employed by other people. I agree that no other social
mechanism can be thought of, because otherwise social systems
are usually conservative and favour hampering, rather than pro-
moting, development (e.g., Janis 1982). Surely, this putative pro-
cess of social inventions is familiar: somebody has a good idea, oth-
ers  learn  about  it,  after  a  period  of  resistance  they  become
accustomed to it and see its advantages, and soon the whole social

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

group  uses  it.  However,  the  speed  of  this  process  critically  de-
pends on such institutions as writing, hierarchical social organisa-
tion (the most powerful accelerator of social development; Cav-
alli-Sforza  &  Feldman  1981),  and  at  least  rudimentary  mass
media.  Churches  and  monasteries  played  an  active  role  in  dis-
semination of new notions and concepts in Europe as well as the
Far East.

Arbib argues that the development of modern languages such
as English required much less time than the time to pass over from
protolanguage to language. This analogy misses, however, the sim-
ple fact that modern languages did not start with a protolanguage.
Rather,  their  starting  point  was  another  highly  developed  lan-
guage. Italian needed only 800 years to reach its peak in The Di-
vine Comedy, but its precursor was Latin.

More generally, the problem can be formulated as follows: the
proposed theory postulates that the development of language was
not supported by natural selection. But the major social mecha-
nisms (e.g., the mechanisms of state, church, writing, social hier-
archies, and fast migration), which might be supposed to have re-
placed  evolutionary  mechanisms,  did  not  exist  when  first
languages developed from their protolanguage ancestors. On the
other hand, social mechanisms which were present from the very
beginning (e.g., socialization in tribes and family education) are
known  to  be  factors  of  conservation  rather  than  development.
Due to these social processes I would expect that genial inventors
of words were ostracized rather than accepted. Hence, it remains
unclear how, if we retain Arbib’s example, the new notion “sour”
might ever have become known to anybody except the closest fel-
lows of its genial inventor. Therefore, any generalisation about the
development of the first human language(s) from what is known
about modern languages is problematic.

Given that the degrees of linguistic and genetic similarity be-
tween  populations  correlate  (Cavalli-Sforza  1996),  and  that  the
transition from protolanguage to language can have covered 1,500
to 2,000 generations, I do not understand why biological mecha-
nisms should be denied during the evolvement of the very first
(but not proto-) language. A possible argument could be the lack
of substantial biological progress between the early Homo sapiens,
having only a protolanguage, and modern people. But this argu-
ment would be misleading because it confounds evolution with
progress and power of different brains with their diversity. There
was not a big genetic progress since the appearance of Homo sapi-
ens, but the genetic changes took place.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by a grant from the Fortune Founda-
tion, University of Tübingen Medical School.

NOTE

1. From the pragmatic point of view, a message always remains “here
and  now.”  For  instance,  I  am  going  to  discuss  the  transition  from  pro-
tolanguage to language, which was about 100,000 years ago, that is, fairly
“beyond  the  here-and-now”;  but  my  aim  is  to  convince  Arbib  or  other
readers today.

Evolutionary sleight of hand: Then, they saw
it; now we don’t

Peter F. MacNeilagea and Barbara L. Davisb
aDepartment of Psychology, The University of Texas at Austin, A8000 Austin,
TX 78712; bDepartment of Communication Sciences and Disorders, The
University of Texas at Austin, A1100 Austin, TX 78712.
macneilage@psy.utexas.edu

babs@mail.utexas.edu

Abstract: Arbib’s gestural-origins theory does not tell us why or how a sub-
sequent switch to vocal language occurred, and shows no systematic con-
cern with the signalling affordances or constraints of either medium. Our
frame/content theory, in contrast, offers both a vocal origin in the inven-
tion  of  kinship  terms  in  a  baby-talk  context  and  an  explanation  for  the
structure of the currently favored medium.

Why is there such a continued interest in formulating gestural-ori-
gins theories of language when they never provide an adequate
reason for the subsequent abandonment of the gestural medium,
or a means of getting us to the eventual vocal one? As to why the
change occurred, Arbib finesses that issue. The usual explanations
– that signed language is not omnidirectional, does not work in the
dark, and ties up the hands – have always constituted an insuffi-
cient basis for such a radical reorganization. As to how the change
occurred, we note that the first gestural-origins theory of the mod-
ern era was proposed by Hewes (1973; 1996), who gracefully ad-
mitted that “The ideas about the movement from a postulated pre-
speech language to a rudimentary spoken one are admittedly the
weakest part of my model” (1996, p. 589). Nothing has changed
since, whether in Arbib’s earlier gestural incarnation (Arbib & Riz-
zolatti 1997), in the most recent reincarnation of Corballis’s ges-
tural-origins  theory  (Corballis  2003a;  see  MacNeilage  2003  for
commentary), or in the present target article.

Arbib is more vulnerable than most on the why problem be-
cause he posits an original open (read unrestricted) pantomimic
protosign stage. Openness is a definitional property of true lan-
guage. Hockett (1978) pointed out, we think correctly, that if man-
ual communication had ever achieved openness, this would have
been such a momentous development that we would never have
abandoned the original form of the incarnation. Besides ignoring
the  why question,  Arbib  palms  the  how question,  saying  only
“Once an organism has an iconic gesture, it can both modulate that
gesture and/or or symbolize it (non-iconically) by ‘simply’ associ-
ating a vocalization with it” (sect. 6.1, para. 2, Arbib’s quotation
marks). Simply?

Arbib’s problems arise from a very disappointing source, given
his own focus on the evolution of action. He shows little regard for
the affordances and constraints of the two language transmission
media (their action components). He consequently misses a num-
ber of opportunities to put constraints on his model. For example,
his problematical conclusion that pantomime could be an open
system disregards a commonly accepted conclusion in linguistics
that for language to become an open system, it must have a com-
binatorial phonology consisting of meaningless elements (such as
consonants and vowels in the vocal medium, and hand shapes, lo-
cations,  and  movements  in  the  manual  medium)  (Jackendoff
2002; Studdert-Kennedy & Lane 1980). He makes scant refer-
ence to modern-day sign languages, apparently regarding them as
an adventitious side effect rather than a central phenomenon that
must be accounted for in a language-evolution context. Where did
modern day sign languages get the combinatorial phonology com-
monly thought to be necessary for an open linguistic system, if
their predecessor already had an open pantomimic system? Arbib
says nothing about the system-level problems of getting from a
pantomimic repertoire to a speech repertoire at either the per-
ceptual or the motor level.

A prominent consequence of Arbib’s neglect of the linguistic ac-
tion component is shown in his dubious contention that hominids
in the protospeech stage could have dashed off complex semantic
concepts with holistic phonetic utterances such as “grooflack” or
“koomzash,” forms that take a modern infant several years to mas-
ter. Such utterances are not holistic today. How could forms with
such internal complexity, sounding like words with modern struc-
ture,  have  originated,  and  how  could  they  have  become  linked
with concepts? Also, if they indeed existed as holistic complexes,
as Arbib claims, how did they get fractionated? And how was the
phonetic fractionation related to the putative semantic fractiona-
tion into present-day forms of class elements such as nouns and
verbs in a way that is consistent with phonology-morphology rela-
tionships in present-day languages?

In light of the problems of gestural origins theories with the
why and how questions, there is a need for a theory of evolution
of language that gets us to modern language in the old-fashioned
way  – by  speaking  it!  Our  frame/content  theory  (MacNeilage
1998; MacNeilage & Davis 1990; 2000) is such a theory. Arbib bills
our theory as being about “the evolution of syllabification as a way

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

137

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

to structure vocal gestures” but asserts that it “offers no clue as to
what might have linked such a process to the expression of mean-
ing” (sect. 6.1, para. 3). Apparently, Arbib did not revise the tar-
get article following an exchange of critiques with him earlier this
year (our paper not being cited in the target article), in which we
described  our  view  that  the  first  words  may  have  been  kinship
terms  formed  in  the  baby-talk  context.  (For  this  exchange,  see
Arbib 2005; MacNeilage & Davis, in press b.)

Michael Arbib’s extension of the mirror-system hypothesis for ex-
plaining the origin of language elegantly sets the stage for further
discussion, but we think it overlooks a crucial source of data – the
kinds of gestures that actually occur in current human linguistic
performance. These data lead us to doubt a basic claim of the “ges-
ture-first” theory, that language started as a gesture language that
was gradually supplanted by speech. Arbib has modified this the-
ory with his concept of an expanding spiral, but this new model
does not go far enough in representing a speech-gesture system
that evolved together.

Classic  gesture-first. The  enduring  popularity  of  “gesture-
first” seems to presuppose that gestures are simple and that as we
humans,  and  language,  became  more  complex,  speech  evolved
and to an extent supplanted gesture, a belief that emerged as part
of the Enlightenment quest for the natural state of man and is
credited to Condillac, and which has continued since (e.g., Hewes
1973; Armstrong et al. 1995; Corballis 2002). However, contrary
to the traditional view, we contend that gesture and language, as
they currently exist, belong to a single system of verbalized think-
ing and communication, and neither can be called the simple twin
of the other. It is this system, in which both speech and gesture are
crucial, that we should be explaining. It makes little sense to ask
which part of an unbroken system is “simpler”; a better question
is how the parts work together.

In this system, we find synchrony and coexpressiveness – ges-
ture and speech conveying the same idea unit, at the same time.
Gesture and speech exhibit what Wundt described long ago as the
“simultaneous” and “sequential” sides of the sentence (Blumen-
thal  1970,  p. 21)  and  Saussure,  in  notes  recently  discovered,
termed  “l’essence  double  du  langage”  (Harris  2002).  Double
essence, not enhancement, is the relationship, and we do not see
how it could have evolved from the supplanting of gestures by
speech. In the remainder of this commentary, we summarize three
sources of evidence to support this assertion.

1. Consider the attached drawing (Fig. 1). The speaker was de-
scribing a cartoon episode in which one character tries to reach
another character by climbing up inside a drainpipe. The speaker

Our primary contribution in this regard has been to refine ear-
lier  conceptions  (cf.  Locke  1993)  of  exactly  how  kinship  terms
might have originated in a baby-talk context (MacNeilage & Davis
2004; in press a). Our argument is that the structure of present-
day baby-talk words is basically identical to the structure of the
first words of early speakers of language. We propose that because 
of  this  basic  identity,  the  first  words  had  forms  like  baby-talk 
forms.

The basic idea (see Falk 2004a, for a recent version) starts from
the contention that nasal vocalizations of infants in the presence
of the mother (perhaps something like “mama”) came to be seen
as standing for the mother. This is consistent with the fact that an
extremely high proportion of words for the female parent in both
baby talk (Ferguson 1964) and in a corpus of 474 languages (Mur-
dock 1959) have nasal consonants in them.

We argue (MacNeilage & Davis 2004) that following this de-
velopment a subsequent word for the male parent would have a
similar simple structure but would need to contrast phonetically
with the word for the female parent. Consistent with this proposal,
words for male parent in baby talk (Ferguson 1964) and languages
(Murdock  1959)  tend  to  favor  oral  consonants  (e.g.,  “papa”  or
“dada”).

The word for female parent in this scenario could be regarded
as iconic in that it consistently “went with” the female parent as a
result of the focus of infant demand on the nearby female parent.
However,  we  argue  that  that  the  force  towards  coining  a  male
parental term that contrasted phonetically with the female term
necessarily introduced an element of arbitrariness into the sound-
meaning linkage. The conscious realization that arbitrary labels
could be attached to concepts, could have started spoken language
on its momentous journey with the typical arbitrary relationship
between concept and sound pattern that has been so difficult to
explain (MacNeilage & Davis 2004).

The baby-talk origins scenario might not seem as plausible as
the idea of pantomimes as first words, but it is the only one of the
two ideas that is consistent with the present-day structure of lan-
guage,  even  down  to  the  level  of  structure  of  particular  lexical
items.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This paper was prepared with support from research grant No. HD 2773-
10 from the U.S. Public Health Service.

Gesture-first, but no gestures?

David McNeill,a Bennett Bertenthal,a Jonathan Cole,b and
Shaun Gallagherc
aDepartment of Psychology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637;
bClinical Neurological Sciences, Clinical Neurophysiology, Poole Hospital,
Longfleet Road, Poole, BH15 2J, United Kingdom; cDepartment of
Philosophy, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816-1352.
dmcneill@uchicago.edu
jonathan@colefamily.org.uk

bbertent@uchicago.edu.

gallaghr@mail.ucf.edu

Abstract: Although  Arbib’s  extension  of  the  mirror-system  hypothesis
neatly sidesteps one problem with the “gesture-first” theory of language
origins, it overlooks the importance of gestures that occur in current-day
human linguistic performance, and this lands it with another problem. We
argue that, instead of gesture-first, a system of combined vocalization and
gestures would have been a more natural evolutionary unit.

138

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

Figure 1 (McNeill,  et  al.). Gesture  combining  upward  move-
ment and interiority. (Computer illustration from a video by Fey
Parrill, University of Chicago).

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

is saying, “and he goes up through the pipe this time,” with the
gesture occurring during the boldfaced portion (the illustration
captures  the  moment  when  the  speaker  says  the  vowel  of
“through”). Coexpressively with “up,” her hand rose upward, and
coexpressively with “through,” her fingers spread outward to cre-
ate an interior space. These took place together and were syn-
chronized with “up through,” the linguistic package that combines
the same meanings.

The effect is a uniquely gestural way of packaging meaning –
something like “rising hollowness,” which does not exist as a se-
mantic package of English at all. Speech and gesture, at the mo-
ment of their synchronization, were coexpressive. The very fact
there is shared reference to the character’s climbing up inside the
pipe makes clear that it is being represented by the speaker in two
ways  simultaneously  – analytic/combinatoric  in  speech  and
global/synthetic in gesture. We suggest it was this very simultane-
ous combination of opposites that evolution seized upon.

2. When signs and speech do combine in contemporary human
performance, they do not synchronize. Kendon (1988) observed
sign languages employed by aboriginal Australian women  – full
languages  developed  culturally  for  (rather  frequent)  speech
taboos – which they sometimes combine with speech. The rele-
vant point is that in producing these combinations, speech and
sign start out synchronously, but then, as the utterance proceeds,
speech  outruns  the  semantically  equivalent  signs.  The  speaker
stops speaking until the signs catch up and then starts over, only
for speech and signs to pull apart again. If, in the evolution of lan-
guage, there had been a similar doubling up of signs and speech,
as  the  supplanting  scenario  implies,  they  too  would  have  been
driven apart rather than into synchrony, and for this reason, too,
we doubt the replacement hypothesis.

3. The Wundt/Saussure “double essence” of gesture and lan-
guage  appears  to  be  carried  by  a  dedicated  thought-hand-lan-
guage circuit in the brain. This circuit strikes us as a prime candi-
date for an evolutionary selection at the foundation of language.
It implies that the aforementioned combinations of speech and
gesture  were  the  selected  units,  not  gesture  first  with  speech
supplanting  or  later  joining  it.  We  observe  this  circuit  in  the
unique neurological case of I.W., who lost all proprioception and
spatial position sense from the neck down at age 19, and has since
taught himself to move using vision and cognition. The thought-
language-hand link, located presumably in Broca’s area, ties to-
gether language and gesture, and, in I.W., survives and is partly
dissociable from instrumental action.

We  can  address  Arbib’s  pantomime  model  by  observing  the
kinds of gestures the dedicated link sustains in I.W.’s performance,
in the absence of vision: his gestures are (1) coexpressive and syn-
chronous with speech; (2) not supplemental; and (3) not derivable
from pantomime. I.W. is unable to perform instrumental actions
without vision but continues to perform speech-synchronized, co-
expressive gestures that are virtually indistinguishable from nor-
mal (topokinetic accuracy is reduced but morphokinetic accuracy
is preserved) (Cole et al. 2002). His gestures without vision, more-
over,  minimize  the  one  quality  that  could  be  derived  from  pan-
tomime, a so-called “first-person” or “character” viewpoint, in which
a gesture replicates an action of a character (cf. McNeill 1992).

More generally, an abundance of evidence demonstrates that
spontaneous, speech-synchronized gestures should be counted as
part of language (McNeill 1992). Gestures are frequent (accom-
panying up to 90% of utterances in narrations). They synchronize
exactly with coexpressive speech segments, implying that gesture
and related linguistic content are coactive in time and jointly con-
vey what is newsworthy in context. Gesture adds cohesion, gluing
together potentially temporally separated but thematically related
segments of discourse. Speech and gesture develop jointly in chil-
dren, and decline jointly after brain injury. In contrast to cultural
emblems, such as the “O.K.” sign, speech-synchronized gestures
occur in all languages, so far as is known. Finally, gestures are not
“signs” with an independent linguistic code. Gestures exist only in
combination with speech, and are not themselves a coded system.

Arbib’s  gesture-first. Arbib’s  concept  of  an  expanding  spiral
may avoid some of the problems of the supplanting mechanism.
He speaks of scaffolding and spiral expansion, which appear to
mean, in both cases, that one thing is preparing the ground for or
propping up further developments of the other thing – speech to
gesture,  gesture  to  speech,  and  so  on.  This  spiral,  as  now  de-
scribed, brings speech and gesture into temporal alignment (see
Fig. 6 in the target article), but also implies two things juxtaposed
rather than the evolution of a single “thing” with a double essence.
Modification to produce a dialectic of speech and gesture, beyond
scaffolding, does not seem impossible. However, the theory is still
focused on gestures of the wrong kind for this dialectic – in terms
of  Kendon’s  Continuum  (see  McNeill  2000  for  two  versions),
signs, emblems, and pantomime. Because it regards all gestures as
simplified and meaning-poor, it is difficult to see how the expand-
ing spiral can expand to include the remaining point on the Con-
tinuum, “gesticulations” – the kind of speech-synchronized coex-
pressive gesture illustrated above.

A compromise is that pantomime was the initial protolanguage
but was replaced by speech plus gesture, leading to the thought-
language-hand link that we have described. This hypothesis has
the interesting implication that different evolutionary trajectories
landed at different points along Kendon’s Continuum. One path
led to pantomime, another to coexpressive and speech-synchro-
nized gesticulation, and so on. These different evolutions are re-
flected  today  in  distinct  ways  of  combining  movements  with
speech. Although we do not question the importance of extending
the mirror system hypothesis, we have concerns about a theory
that predicts, as far as gesture goes, the evolution of what did not
evolve instead of what did.

Meaning and motor actions: Artificial life and
behavioral evidence

Domenico Parisi,a Anna M. Borghi,b Andrea Di Ferdinando,c
and Giorgio Tsiotasb
aInstitute of Cognitive Science and Technologies, National Research Council,
Rome 00137, Italy; bDepartment of Psychology, University of Bologna,
Bologna 40127, Italy; cDepartment of Psychology, University of Padua,
Padua 35131, Italy. d.parisi@istc.cnr.it
http://gral.ip.rm.cnr.it/dparisi/
http://gral.ip.rm.cnr.it/borghi/
http://ccnl.psy.unipd.it/di_ferdinando.html

annamaria.borghi@unibo.it
andrea.diferdinando@unipd.it

giorgio@tsiotas.com

Abstract: Mirror neurons may play a role in representing not only signs
but also their meaning. Because actions are the only aspect of behavior
that are inter-individually accessible, interpreting meanings in terms of ac-
tions might explain how meanings can be shared. Behavioral evidence and
artificial life simulations suggest that seeing objects or processing words
referring to objects automatically activates motor actions.

Arbib argues that the vocal signs of human language are probably
evolved from the gestural signs of some protolanguage, and this
might  explain  why  the  production  of  vocal  signs  in  the  human
brain is controlled by Broca’s area – which corresponds to area V5
in monkeys’ brain – which controls manual actions. The discovery
of neurons in both areas that are activated both when a manual ac-
tion is executed and when it is observed in others (mirror neurons)
reinforces this interpretation, because language is based on what
Arbib  calls  the  parity  requirement,  according  to  which  what
counts for the speaker must count approximately the same for the
hearer.

However, language is not only signs but is signs plus the mean-
ing of signs. Mirror neurons tend to be invoked to explain the pro-
duction of linguistic signs but they may also play an important role
in the representation of the meaning of those signs. If meanings
are interpreted as categories of entities in the environment, one
can argue that these categories are represented in the brain in

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

139

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

terms of the motor actions that we execute on them. Two entities
are included in the same category, that is, they evoke the same pat-
tern of neural activity, if we tend to execute the same actions on
them, whereas two entities are included in different categories if
we tend to execute different actions on them.

If we interpret not only signs but also their meaning in terms of
motor actions, we can understand how meanings can be shared
between speakers and hearers. Motor actions are the only aspect
of behavior which is inter-individually accessible. A has no direct
access to what B perceives, feels, or thinks, but only to how B
moves  its  body  and  to  the  consequences  of  these  movements.
Meanings can be shared if the categories they refer to are repre-
sented in terms of motor actions in the brain of both speaker and
hearer. Mirror neurons can play a role not only with respect to the
motor (phono-articulatory) actions that result in the production of
vocal signs but also with respect to the motor actions of all kinds
that we execute on the entities that vocal signs refer to. A gestural
origin of human language may have facilitated the emergence of
shared  meanings.  As  Arbib  recognizes,  gestural  signs  are  more
iconic than vocal signs, which means that gestural signs are motor
actions which physically resemble the motor actions that we exe-
cute on the entities they refer to. Vocal signs are arbitrary, that is,
non-iconic,  but  they  may  have  exploited  the  already  existing
shared meanings neurally represented in terms of inter-interindi-
vidually accessible motor actions executed on objects.

Artificial life simulations and experiments suggest that seeing
objects or processing words referring to objects automatically ac-
tivates canonical actions we perform on them, particularly reach-
ing and grasping movements. Borghi and colleagues (Borghi et al.
2002, 2005, submitted; Di Ferdinando & Parisi 2004) evolved sim-
ulated organisms using a genetic algorithm (Holland 1992). Each
organism lives in a bidimensional environment containing four ob-
jects, either upright or reversed, with a handle protruding on the
right or on the left. The organism possesses a visual system allow-
ing it to see different objects, one at a time, and a motor system
consisting of a single arm composed of two movable segments; the
arm sends proprioceptive information to the organism, specifying
the  arm’s  current  position.  The  organism’s  nervous  system  was
simulated with a neural network (Fig. 1).

Organisms learned to reach the handle of the object indepen-
dently of its position (Task 1) and then they learned to reach one
of two buttons located below the handle to decide whether the ob-
ject was upright or reversed (Task 2). In one condition, the button
to be reached was on the same side of the object’s handle; in an-
other condition, it was on the opposite side. Task 1 reproduced
real-life  experience;  Task  2  replicated  an  experiment  made  by

Figure 1 (Parisi et al.). Neural network controlling an arm.

140

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

Figure 2 (Parisi et al.). Neural network controlling an arm and
a hand.

Tucker and Ellis (1998). When the handle location and the button
were spatially compatible, learning occurred earlier (in terms of
generations required to reach an optimal performance) than when
they were not. The results suggest that affordances of objects be-
come learned in association with successful reaching movements.
Once reaching becomes established, seeing the handle of objects
activates appropriate movements.

Tsiotas et al. (in press) simulated an organism with a nervous
system (Fig. 2) and with an arm terminating with a hand composed
of two fingers, a thumb and an index, each composed by two seg-
ments.

The organism lived in a bidimensional environment containing
four objects, either large or small and red or blue. First, the or-
ganism had to learn to grasp small objects with a precision grip and
large objects with a power grip, then to decide the objects’ color
by grasping a small or a large button. Learning occurred earlier
when the grip required to respond to the object and to decide the
color was the same than when it was not, even if object size was
irrelevant for the task (Ellis & Tucker 2000).

The inter-accessibility of these simple gestures which are auto-
matically activated by objects, may have played a relevant role for
language evolution. Crucially, these gestures are automatically ac-
tivated not only by visual stimuli but by words, too (Gentilucci
2003b; Tucker & Ellis 2004). Borghi et al. (2004) found in a part-
verification task that responding by moving the arm in a direction
incompatible with the part location (e.g., responding downward to
verify that a car has a roof, upward to verify that a car has wheels)
was slow relative to responding in a direction compatible with the
part location.

The  presence  of  action-based  compatibility  effects  also  with
words, argues for the involvement not only of the dorsal but also
of the ventral system and of long-term knowledge in generating
affordances: accordingly, these effects would be accounted for by
long-term  visuomotor  associations  between  objects  and  actions
executed on them.

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

An avian parallel to primate mirror neurons
and language evolution?

Irene M. Pepperberg
Department of Psychology, Brandeis University, MS062, Waltham, MA
02454. impepper@media.mit.edu

http://www.alexfoundation.org

Abstract: Arbib presents a reasoned explanation for language evolution
from nonhuman to human primates, one that I argue can be equally ap-
plied to animals trained in forms of interspecies communication. I apply
his  criteria  for  language  readiness  and  language  (in  actuality,  protolan-
guage) to the behavior of a Grey parrot (Psittacus erithacus) taught to com-
municate with humans using rudiments of English speech.

Arbib approaches an old chestnut – language evolution – from the
novel standpoint of mirror neurons (MN), building upon his ear-
lier theses. His counterarguments for innatist theories are clearly
on target. With little to critique, I focus on possible parallels be-
tween Arbib’s proposals and Grey parrot behavior – particularly
that of my oldest subject, Alex (Pepperberg 1999).

Concerning Arbib’s criteria for language-readiness (LR), little
is unique to primates. Arbib provides not LR but CCR – “com-
plex communication-ready” – criteria. He suggests this possibility
but omits details. LR1 (complex imitation), reproduction of novel
behavior that can be approximated by existent actions and their
variants, is demonstrated, for example, by Alex’s initial immediate
utterance  of  “s(pause)wool”  for  “spool”  (for  a  wooden  bobbin;
Pepperberg  2005b,  /p/ being  particularly  difficult  to  produce
without lips and teeth (Patterson & Pepperberg 1998). LR2 (sym-
bolization), LR3 (parity), and LR4 (intention) are demonstrated
in detailed studies of Alex’s referential communication (Pepper-
berg 1999). LR5 (temporal versus hierarchical ordering) is more
difficult to prove, except possibly in the understanding and use of
interactive dialogue (Pepperberg 1999). LR6 (past/future) occurs
in any animal that can be operantly conditioned. Although few
data exist on Grey parrot behavior in nature, LR7 is likely, given
that Greys take several years to reach sexual maturity.

In LA1 through LA4, Arbib also focuses on primates, but Greys
seemingly meet most criteria. For LA1, for example, Alex trans-
fers the use of “none” from responding to “What’s same/differ-
ent?” for two objects when nothing is same or different, to re-
sponding to, without training, “What color bigger?” for equally
sized  objects  (Pepperberg  &  Brezinsky  1991),  and  then,  again
without training, to designate an absent quantity in an enumera-
tion  task  (Pepperberg  &  Gordon  2005).  Furthermore,  to  Alex,
“paper,” for example, is not merely index card pieces used for ini-
tial training, but large sheets of computer output, newspapers, and
students’ textbooks. For LA2, Alex comprehends recursive, con-
junctive queries (e.g., “What object is green and 3-corner?” ver-
sus “What color is wood and 4-corner?” versus “What shape is blue
and wool?”; Pepperberg 1992). LA3 has not been demonstrated
directly  in  Greys,  but  birds  likely  have  episodic  memory  (e.g.,
work by Clayton et al. 2003). LA4, learnability, exists with respect
to semantics and, to a limited extent, for sentence frames (appro-
priate use of “I want X” versus “Wanna go Y”; Pepperberg 1999).
Interestingly, Arbib’s criteria closely parallel Hockett’s (1959) de-
sign features; direct comparison would be instructive.

Given these parallels, do Grey parrots also have MN systems –
neurons  that,  for  example,  react  similarly  when  birds  hear  and
speak human labels? Biologically, existent evidence is sparse but
intriguing. For oscine birds’ own song, some parallels exist with
primates. Songbirds’ high vocal center (HVC) sends efferents to
both input and output branches of the song system; HVC is nec-
essary for song production and has neurons showing song-specific
auditory  responses  (Williams  1989).  Furthermore,  playback  of
birds’ own song during sleep causes neural activity comparable to
actual singing (Dave & Margoliash 2000).

How these findings relate to parrot brains, which are organized
differently  from  songbird  brains  (e.g.,  Jarvis  &  Mello  2000;
Striedter 1994) is unclear. Although studies of ZENK gene1 ex-

pression show separation of budgerigar (Melopsittacus undulates)
response regions for hearing and vocalizing warble song (Jarvis &
Mello 2000), electrophysiological studies in the frontal neostria-
tum of awake budgerigars show activity both in production of and
response to calls (Plumer & Striedter 1997; 2000); evidence also
exists  for  additional  budgerigar  auditory-vocal  pathways  (e.g.,
Brauth et al. 2001). Because ZENK response apparently is tuned
to specific song features (Ribeiro et al. 1998), the relevance of
these data for MNs in talking parrots is unknown.

However, arguments for complex imitation, and by inference,
brain structures to support such behavior, exist. Like children de-
scribed by Arbib, Alex goes beyond simple imitation; he acquires
the  phonological  repertoire,  some  words,  and  basic  “assembly
skills” of his trainers and appears to parse complex behavior pat-
terns (words and phrases) into recombinable pieces and familiar
(or semi-familiar) actions. In addition to material described above,
Alex (1) recognizes and produces small phonetic differences (“tea”
vs. “pea”) meaningfully (Patterson & Pepperberg 1994; 1998), (2)
produces  initial  phonemes  differently  depending  upon  subse-
quent ones (/k/ in “key” vs. “cork”; Patterson & Pepperberg 1998),
and (3) consistently recombines parts of labels according to their
order in existent labels (i.e., combines beginnings of one label with
the  ends  of  others  – e.g.,  “banerry”  [for  apples]  from  banana/
cherry. After analyzing more than 22,000 vocalizations, we never
observed  backwards  combinations  such  as  “percup”  instead  of
“cupper/copper”; Pepperberg et al. 1991).

Surprisingly, Arbib doesn’t discuss Greenfield’s (1991) studies
that  might  also  involve  co-opting  gestural  forms  for  vocal  lan-
guage, although she does not examine MNs and imitation. Appar-
ently,  human  children  – and  language-trained  chimps,  but  not
monkeys  – simultaneously  develop  hierarchical  object  and  lin-
guistic ordering (e.g., serial cup stacking, phrases like I ⫹ want ⫹
X) as, Greenfield argues, a consequence of Broca/F5 maturation.
MNs in these brain areas are activated by both action and obser-
vation  of  hand  or  mouth  gestures;  less  advanced  MNs  exist  in
monkeys than in apes and humans. Similar behavior is observed
in Grey parrots (Pepperberg & Shive 2001), although avian com-
binations both involve the beak. Greenfield implies that these ac-
tions emerge without overt instruction; however, these behavior
patterns are likely observed from birth (or hatching). Maybe only
after maturation of MN and canonical neuron systems can they be
expressed (Pepperberg 2005a).

In sum, the communication system I have taught Grey parrots
will never be fully congruent with any current human language,
but I am intrigued by the many parallels that can be drawn be-
tween their protolanguage and that described by Arbib for early
Homo: Start with a brain of a certain complexity and give it enough
social and ecological support; that brain will develop at least the
building blocks of a complex communication system.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Preparation  of  this  commentary  was  supported  by  donors  to  The  Alex
Foundation.

NOTE

1. Expression of the ZENK gene, a songbird analog to a human tran-
scription factor, egr-1, is driven by actions of singing and hearing. Hence,
it is used to form a functional map of avian brains for behavior related to
both auditory processing and vocal production (Jarvis & Mello 2000).

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

141

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

Contagious yawning and laughing: Everyday
imitation- and mirror-like behavior

Robert R. Provine
Department of Psychology, University of Maryland Baltimore County,
Baltimore, MD 21250. provine@umbc.edu

Abstract: Infectious yawning and laughing offer a convenient, noninva-
sive approach to the evolution, development, production, and control of
imitation-like and mirror-like phenomena in normal, behaving humans.

The  analysis  of  a  scientific  problem  can  benefit  from  taking  a
broad perspective before turning to narrower and more reductive
issues. In this spirit, I nominate contagious yawning and laughing
for consideration, which are two of the most familiar cases of hu-
man behavior with imitation-like and mirror-like properties. Even
their relegation to special-case status would help set parameters
and inform readers who are more familiar with these acts than
such esoteric and inaccessible phenomena as mirror neurons. An
attractive feature of contagious yawning and laughing as scientific
problems is that we can use ourselves as subjects  – no electro-
physiological laboratory is required. They also offer tantalizing in-
sights  into  the  evolutionary  process  through  which  a  motor  act
may become mirrored or imitated.

Contagious yawning and laughing involve a chain reaction of
behavior  and  physiology  that  propagates  through  and  synchro-
nizes  the  state  of  a  group.  Being  unconsciously  controlled,  the
contagious responses do not involve a desire to replicate an ob-
served yawn or laugh – we just do them. Although the sensory vec-
tor for contagious yawns is primarily visual and that for laughter is
primarily auditory, both contagious acts involve the replication of
observed movements, whether the facial contortions of the yawn,
or  the  respiratory  movements  that  produce  the  vocalization  of
laughter.

Although the focus of this commentary is on the mirror-like and
imitation-like properties of contagion, the analysis of mechanism
must begin with the motor act brought under stimulus control.
Yawns and laughs evolved before the stimulus triggers responsi-
ble for their contagion. This is a case of motor precocity, the com-
mon tendency of motor systems to develop or evolve prior to re-
ceiving  sensory  inputs.  Organisms  often  “spond  before  they
respond.” Motor systems can be adaptive, stand-alone processes,
unlike sensory systems that, by themselves, lack adaptive signifi-
cance because they have no behavioral consequence. (By exten-
sion, reflexes are unlikely to emerge de novo because they require
the improbable simultaneous genesis of both a sensory and motor
process.) Let us now consider the evolution of yawning and laugh-
ing and how they came under sensory control.

Yawning (Provine 1986) is an ancient, stereotyped motor pat-
tern that is performed by most vertebrates and develops prena-
tally in humans. Once initiated, a yawn goes to completion – re-
call the difficulty of stifling a yawn. There are no half-yawns. The
motor pattern generator for yawning probably resides in the brain
stem along with other pulmonary and vasomotor control centers.
A yawn, like a laugh, is not under voluntary control and cannot be
produced on command.

Contagious  yawning  (Provine  1986;  1989)  probably  emerged
many  millions  of  years  after  the  ubiquitous  motor  act  and,  al-
though it may be present in other species, has been clearly demon-
strated only in humans. Lacking the remarkable precocity of the
motor act, contagious yawning of humans appears sometime dur-
ing early childhood, a developmental trajectory that suggests the
involvement of a separate and higher brain mechanism. Conta-
gious yawns can be triggered by the observation of the overall con-
figuration of the animate, yawning face, regardless of its axial ori-
entation or presence of the gaping mouth. (Shielding a yawn will
not  block  its  contagion.)  The  neurological  yawn  detector  is  so
broadly tuned that almost any stimulus associated with yawning
can trigger the act, including, as some readers have noticed, even
thinking about or reading about yawning. The broad tuning in-

142

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

sures contagion in darkness or in the absence of line-of-sight vi-
sual contact with a yawner.

Laughter has a clearer and much shorter history than yawning
and  is  associated  with  the  evolution  of  social  play  in  mammals
(Provine 1996; 2000). Laughter is literally the sound of labored
breathing in rough and tumble play, where the sound of panting
has come to represent the playful act that produced it. Ethologists
refer to such processes as ritualization. Laughter evolved as a play
vocalization, an unconsciously controlled, therefore honest signal
that an encounter has playful intent and is not a physical assault.
In  humans,  the  “pant-pant”  laughter  of  our  primate  ancestors
morphed into “ha-ha.” Laughter is the clearest example of how a
vocalization evolved – it does not involve the arbitrary pairing of
a sound with a meaning. (The transition from “pant-pant” to “ha-
ha” laughter reflects the increased vocal control of humans en-
abled by bipedality and ultimately explains why we can speak and
other  great  apes  cannot.)  Laughter  and  speech  time-share  the
same  vocal  apparatus,  but  each  maintains  unique  features  and
neurological mechanisms. Laughter lacks the voluntary control of
spoken words, and we tend to either laugh or speak, with speech
being dominant because laughter seldom interrupts the phrase
structure of speech. Laughter punctuates the speech stream (Pro-
vine 1993).

Laughter triggers the laughter of those who hear it, synchro-
nizing and amplifying the neurobehavioral status of a group. It is
the basis of the notorious television laugh tracks. Crying is another
infectious  vocalization,  at  least  among  human  infants  (Simner
1971). As suggested by Arbib, such processes are probably com-
mon among animals. Contagious laughs occur almost immediately
after the stimulus laugh, in contrast to contagious yawns where
there is a gradual increase in the probability of yawning during the
seconds after the observed yawn.

A  challenge  of  comparing  the  mirror  systems  of  Arbib  with
those of yawning and laughter is that so little is known about the
neurology of the latter. The laughing/yawning systems may, for ex-
ample, more resemble systems involved in monkey vocalizations
(midbrain  and  cingulate  cortex)  than  those  for  language  (e.g.,
Broca’s and Wernicke’s regions) or the specific mirror system con-
sidered by Arbib, the hand and orofacial system of monkey pre-
motor area F5. However, the yawning/laughter systems may be a
convenient exemplar of a class of processes at the foundation of
Arbib’s proposal that can teach us about mirror/imitation mecha-
nisms and their evolution. The parsimony of biological systems
suggests that, in whole or in part, standard processes, components,
and circuits in the neurological tool kit are likely to find many ap-
plications.

Motivation rather than imitation determined
the appearance of language

Pavel N. Prudkov
Ecomon Ltd., Selskohosyastvennaya ul. 12-a, Moscow, Russia.
pnprudkov@mtu-net.ru

Abstract: Arbib derives the origin of language from the emergence of a
complex imitation system; however, it is unlikely that this complication
could occur without a prior complicating within the imitated systems. This
means that Arbib’s hypothesis is not correct, because the other systems de-
termined the appearance of language. In my opinion, language emerged
when the motivational system became able to support goal-directed pro-
cesses with no innate basis.

In the target article Arbib derives the origin of language from the
emergence of a complex imitation system among ancient Homo.
Describing in detail how the complex imitation system could fa-
cilitate the formation of protosign and protospeech, he says noth-
ing, however, about why this system must have emerged. This is a
serious problem; imitation is, by definition, copying of other pro-

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

cesses, therefore the complexity of the imitation system of an or-
ganism cannot exceed the complexity of the systems to be imi-
tated.  This  principle  seriously  constrains  the  possibility  of  the
emergence of a new, more complex imitation system without the
corresponding  complicating  within  the  systems  to  be  imitated.
Such a possibility seems to underlie Arbib’s approach because, in
emphasizing the changes in the imitation system, he does not re-
quire similar fundamental changes in other systems.

Of course, it is impossible to abandon the idea that the complex
imitation  system  could  emerge  as  a  result  of  a  single  mutation
without the corresponding changes in other systems of some an-
cient  hominids;  but  such  hominids  occasionally  benefited  from
their new possibilities, thereby surviving successfully, until other
systems achieved the complexity of the imitation system; and then
natural selection started working more conventionally again. The
probability of this scenario is extremely low, obviously. Another
approach  to  the  origin  of  the  complex  imitation  system,  which
seems much more probable, is that a certain complication of other
systems preceded this system and made its appearance necessary.
This, however, means that Arbib’s hypothesis suggesting that the
complex imitation system is the “missing link” is not correct, be-
cause  other  systems  in  fact  determined  the  appearance  of  lan-
guage.

Like other hypotheses of language origin, Arbib’s hypothesis is
based on the idea that language is a means of communication. This
definition is correct but incomplete: language is a means of com-
munication for people engaged in a joint activity. There is a clear
correlation between the diversity of activities and the complexity
of the language serving these activities. Modern languages consist
of hundreds of thousands of words only because these languages
are applied in thousands of diverse activities. Each human activ-
ity is goal-directed, hence, the complexity of languages is a conse-
quence of the ability of the human brain to construct diverse goals.
Indeed, most human goals are not constrained by any innate ba-
sis; they are social, and result from interactions between people.
So, there is an obvious connection between language and the abil-
ity to construct and maintain long-term motivations with no innate
basis.

No nonhuman animals have a motivational system with similar
characteristics.  Animals  have  long-term  motivations  (e.g.,  sex,
hunger), but these are all innate. An animal can form learned mo-
tivations,  but  only  when  its  basic  drives  are  activated.  The  hy-
pothesis that the motivation of animals is always constrained by
the  activation  of  basic  drives  was  suggested  by  Kohler  (1917/
1927), and despite intensive researches, there have still been no
data inconsistent with it (Suddendorf & Corballis 1997). With the
limited and stable number of long-term motivations, animals are
constrained  in  using  and  developing  their  languages.  Since  all
their motivations are connected with vital functions, any serious
misunderstanding in the process of communication can be fatal;
as a result, the number of signals in animal languages must be lim-
ited, and the signals must have unequivocal meanings. Roughly
speaking, animals do not have a language similar to human lan-
guages because they simply do not need it.

I have suggested elsewhere that the emergence of the ability to
construct and maintain long-term goals with no innate basis was
the missing link for language (Prudkov 1999c) and for the other
distinctively  human  characteristics  (Prudkov  1999a;  1999b)  be-
cause the ability allowed ancient humans to overcome the con-
straints  of  innate  motivations,  thus  providing  the  possibility  of 
constructing new, flexible, and open systems. In other words, pro-
tolanguage  emerged  because  in  new  situations  conditioned  by
goals having no innate basis, the innate communicative means be-
came inefficient for interactions between ancient hominids, and
those who were able to construct new means succeeded in repro-
duction. Of course, language, imitation, and the theory of mind
had started evolving then. It is very important to emphasize that
without the prior (or parallel) formation of the system able to con-
struct learned, long-term motivations, any changes in other sys-
tems (e.g., in intelligence) were not sufficient to overcome innate

constraints. For example, the capacity of birds to navigate in three-
dimensional space on the basis of visual cues obviously exceeds
that of humans, but innate mechanisms determine the behavior of
birds.

It is reasonable to think that there was a reciprocal interaction
in the evolution of human language and motivation. The new mo-
tivational ability spurred the development of language; afterwards
language  was  used  to  construct  efficient,  purposeful  processes,
and this interaction likely determined all stages of human evolu-
tion. This joint evolution was facilitated by the fact that a common
mechanism that evolved within these systems is the capacity to
form and execute complex, hierarchical, goal-directed processes
(such processes are rapid and relatively simple in language and are
slow  and  complex  in  motivation)  (Prudkov  &  Rodina  1999).  In
other  words,  I  agree  with  Arbib  that  humans  have  a  language-
ready  brain  rather  than  special  mechanisms  embedded  in  the
genome. The capacity was also involved in the development of the
imitation system, because a basic characteristic distinguishing the
human imitation system from its animal analogs is the possibility
to imitate more complex and long-term processes. But the devel-
opment of the imitation system itself is not sufficient to construct
protolanguage, because only the new motivational system could
make imitation voluntary and arbitrary. Indeed, in emphasizing
that at a certain stage of evolution communication became volun-
tary and intentional, Arbib does not explain what mechanisms un-
derlay such possibilities of communication.

In my opinion, the gestural and vocal components of protolan-
guage emerged together, but the latter gained advantage in the
development because, unlike gestures, which are effective only in
dyadic contacts, vocalizations are more effective in group actions
(group hunting, collective self-defense, etc.), which became the
first actions guided by goals having no innate basis.

Vocal gestures and auditory objects

Josef P. Rauschecker
Laboratory of Integrative Neuroscience and Cognition, Georgetown
University School of Medicine, Washington, DC 20057-1460.
rauschej@georgetown.edu

Abstract: Recent studies in human and nonhuman primates demonstrate
that auditory objects, including speech sounds, are identified in anterior
superior temporal cortex projecting directly to inferior frontal regions and
not along a posterior pathway, as classically assumed. By contrast, the role
of posterior temporal regions in speech and language remains largely un-
explained, although a concept of vocal gestures may be helpful.

In his target article, Arbib maintains (and before him, Rizzolatti &
Arbib 1998) that language originated from a system of mirror neu-
rons coding manual gestures, rather than from vocal communica-
tion systems present in nonhuman primates (and other animals).
I do not doubt the usefulness of the mirror-neuron concept, which
brings back to mind the motor theory of speech perception (Liber-
man et al. 1967). In fact, many recent neuroimaging studies have
independently  demonstrated  a  simultaneous  activation  of  what
were previously thought of as separate centers for the production
and perception of human language, Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas,
respectively. These designations go back more than a century to
crudely characterized single-case studies of neurological patients,
which have been shown by modern magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) techniques (Bookheimer 2002) to have missed much more
brain than the relatively small regions that now bear their discov-
erers’ names.

Both on that basis and on the basis of his own belief in inter-
twined systems of perception and action, it is surprising that Ar-
bib continues to use this outdated terminology. “Broca’s area” at
least is redefined by him as part of a system that deals with, among
others,  “sequential  operations  that  may  underlie  the  ability  to

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

143

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

form words out of dissociable elements” (sect. 8), a definition that
many  researchers  could  agree  with,  although  the  exact  corre-
spondence with cytoarchitectonically defined areas and the ho-
mologies between human and nonhuman primates are still con-
troversial. “Wernicke’s area,” by contrast, gets short shrift. Arbib
talks about it as consisting of the posterior part of Brodmann’s area
22, including area Tpt of Galaburda and Sanides (1980) and an
“extended [parietal area] PF,” suggesting that this is the only route
that auditory input takes after it reaches primary auditory cortex.
Of course, this suggestion echoes the classical textbook view of a
posterior  language  pathway  leading  from  Wernicke’s  to  Broca’s
area via the arcuate fascicle.

A  remarkable  convergence  of  recent  neurophysiological  and
functional  imaging  work  has  demonstrated,  however,  that  the
analysis of complex auditory patterns and their eventual identifi-
cation as auditory objects occurs in a completely different part of
the superior temporal cortex, namely, its anterior portion. The an-
terior superior temporal (aST) region, including the anterior su-
perior temporal gyrus (STG) and to some extent the dorsal aspect
of  the  superior  temporal  sulcus  (STS),  project  to  the  inferior
frontal (IF) region and other parts of the ventrolateral prefrontal
cortex (VLPFC) via the uncinate fascicle. Together, the aST and
IF cortices seem to form a “what” stream for the recognition of
auditory objects (Rauschecker 1998; Rauschecker & Tian 2000),
quite similar to the ventral stream for visual object identification
postulated previously (Ungerleider & Mishkin 1982). Neurophys-
iological data from rhesus monkeys suggest that neurons in the
aST are more selective for species-specific vocalizations than are
neurons in the posterior STG (Tian et al. 2001). In humans, there
is direct evidence from functional imaging work that intelligible
speech as well as other complex sound objects are decoded in the
aST (Binder et al. 2004; Scott et al. 2000; Zatorre et al. 2004).

It  seems,  therefore,  that  the  same  anatomical  substrate  sup-
ports both the decoding of vocalizations in nonhuman primates
and the decoding of human speech. If this is the case, the conclu-
sion is hard to escape that the aST in nonhuman primates is a pre-
cursor of the same region in humans and (what Arbib may be re-
luctant  to  accept)  that  nonhuman  primate  vocalizations  are  an
evolutionary  precursor  to  human  speech  sounds.  Indeed,  the
same  phonological  building  blocks  (or  “features”),  such  as  fre-
quency-modulated (FM) sweeps, band-passed noise bursts, and
so on, are contained in monkey calls as well as human speech. Ad-
mittedly, the decoding of complex acoustic sound structure alone
is far from sufficient for language comprehension, but it is a nec-
essary precondition for the effective use of spoken speech as a
medium of communication. Arbib argues, with some justification,
that communication is not bound to an acoustic (spoken) medium
and can also function on the basis of visual gestures. However, in
most  hearing  humans  the  acoustic  medium,  that  is,  “vocal  ges-
tures,” have gained greatest importance as effective and reliable
carriers of information.

An interesting question remaining, in my mind, is, therefore,
how the auditory feature or object system in the aST could inter-
act with a possible mirror system, as postulated by Arbib and col-
leagues. The projection from aST to IF seems like a possible can-
didate to enable such an interaction. Indeed, auditory neurons,
some of them selectively responsive to species-specific vocaliza-
tions,  are  found  in  the  VLPFC  (Romanski  &  Goldman-Rakic
2002). According to our view, aST serves a similar role in the au-
ditory system as inferotemporal (IT) cortex does for the visual sys-
tem. Which role, if any, Wernicke’s area (or posterior STG) plays
for vocal communication, including speech and language, remains
the bigger puzzle. Understanding it as an input stage to parietal
cortex in an auditory dorsal pathway is a good hint. However, as
Arbib would say, “empirical data are sadly lacking” and need to be
collected urgently.

144

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

Continuities in vocal communication argue
against a gestural origin of language

Robert M. Seyfarth
Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104. seyfarth@psych.upenn.edu
http://www.psych.upenn.edu/~seyfarth/Baboon%20research/index.htm

Abstract: To conclude that language evolved from vocalizations, through
gestures, then back to vocalizations again, one must first reject the simpler
hypothesis that language evolved from prelinguistic vocalizations. There is
no reason to do so. Many studies – not cited by Arbib – document conti-
nuities in behavior, perception, cognition, and neurophysiology between
human speech and primate vocal communication.

Arbib argues that the emergence of human speech “owes little to
nonhuman vocalizations” and concludes that “evolution did not
proceed directly from monkey-like primate vocalizations to speech
but  rather  proceeded  from  vocalization  to  manual  gesture  and
back to vocalization again” (target article, sect. 2.3). Accepting this
hypothesis requires us to adopt a convoluted argument over a sim-
ple one. There is no need to do so.

If dozens of scientists had been studying the natural vocaliza-
tions of nonhuman primates for the past 25 years and all had con-
cluded that the vocal communication of monkeys and apes exhib-
ited no parallels whatsoever with spoken language, one might be
forced to entertain Arbib’s hypothesis. If years of neurobiological
research on the mechanisms that underlie the perception of calls
by  nonhuman  primates  had  revealed  no  parallels  with  human
speech perception, this, too, might compel us to reject the idea
that human language evolved from nonhuman primate vocaliza-
tions. Neither of these conclusions, however, is correct.

Arbib  offers  his  hypothesis  as  if  he  had  carefully  reviewed 
the literature on nonhuman primate vocal communication and
thoughtfully rejected its relevance to the evolution of human lan-
guage. Readers should be warned, however, that his review ends
around 1980 and even neglects some important papers published
before that date.

Primate  vocal  repertoires  contain  several  different  call  types
that grade acoustically into one another. Despite this inter-grada-
tion, primates produce and perceive their calls as, roughly speak-
ing, discretely different signals. Different call types are given in
different social contexts (e.g., Cheney & Seyfarth 1982; Fischer
1998; Fischer et al. 2001a; Hauser 1998; Snowdon et al. 1986). In
playback experiments, listeners respond in distinct ways to these
different call types, as if each type conveys different information
(e.g., Fischer 1998; Fischer et al. 2001b; Rendall et al. 1999). Lis-
teners discriminate between similar call types in a manner that
parallels  – but does not exactly duplicate  – the categorical per-
ception  found  in  human  speech  (Fischer  &  Hammerschmidt
2001; Owren et al. 1992; Prell et al. 2002; Snowdon 1990; Zoloth
et al. 1979). Offering further evidence for parallels with human
speech, the grunts used by baboons (and probably many other pri-
mates) differ according to the placement of vowel-like formants
(Owren et al. 1997; Rendall 2003).

Arbib incorrectly characterizes primate vocalizations as “invol-
untary” signals. To the contrary, ample evidence shows that non-
human  primate  call  production  can  be  brought  under  operant
control (Peirce 1985) and that individuals use calls selectively in
the presence of others with whom they have different social rela-
tions (for further review and discussion, see Cheney & Seyfarth
1990; Seyfarth & Cheney 2003b).

Because nonhuman primates use predictably different calls in
different social and ecological contexts, listeners can extract highly
specific information from them, even in the absence of any sup-
porting contextual cues. For example, listeners respond to acousti-
cally different alarm calls as if they signal the presence of differ-
ent  predators  (Fichtel  &  Hammerschmidt  2002;  Fischer  1998;
Seyfarth et al. 1980), and to acoustically different grunts as if they
signal the occurrence of different social events (Cheney & Sey-

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

farth 1982; Rendall et al. 1999). In habituation-dishabituation ex-
periments that asked listeners to make a same-different judgment
between calls, subjects assessed calls based on their meaning, not
just their acoustic properties (Cheney & Seyfarth 1988; Zuber-
buhler  et  al.  1999).  The  parallels  with  children’s  perception  of
words cannot be ignored (see Zuberbuhler 2003 for review).

Indeed, it is now clear that although primates’ production of vo-
calizations is highly constrained, their ability to extract complex in-
formation from sounds is not (Seyfarth & Cheney 2003b). Upon
hearing a sequence of vocalizations, for example, listeners acquire
information  that  is  referential,  discretely  coded,  hierarchically
structured,  rule-governed,  and  propositional  (Bergman  et  al.
2003; Cheney & Seyfarth, in press). These properties of primates’
social knowledge, although by no means fully human, bear strik-
ing resemblances to the meanings we express in language, which
are built up by combining discrete-valued entities in a structured,
hierarchical,  rule-governed,  and  open-ended  manner.  Results
suggest that the internal representations of language meaning in
the human brain initially emerged from our prelinguistic ances-
tors’ knowledge of social relations, as exhibited in the information
they  acquire  from  vocalizations  (Cheney  &  Seyfarth  1997;  in
press; Worden 1998).

Nonhuman primate vocalizations also exhibit parallels with hu-
man speech in their underlying neural mechanisms. Behavioral
studies of macaques suggest that the left hemisphere is specialized
for processing species-specific vocalizations but not other auditory
stimuli (Hauser & Anderson 1994; Petersen et al. 1978). Lesion
results demonstrate that ablation of auditory cortex on the left but
not the right hemisphere disrupts individuals’ ability to discrimi-
nate  among  acoustically  similar  call  types  (Heffner  &  Heffner
1984). Most recently, Poremba et al. (2004) measured local cere-
bral metabolic activity as macaques listened to a variety of audi-
tory stimuli. They found significantly greater activity in the left su-
perior  temporal  gyrus  as  compared  with  the  right,  but  only  in
response  to  conspecific  vocalizations.  These  and  other  results
(e.g.,  Wang  et  al.  1995;  see  Hauser  [1996]  and  Ghazanfar  &
Hauser [2001] for review) suggest that Arbib is wrong to assume
that primate vocalizations “appear to be related to non-cortical re-
gions” (sect. 1. 2, para. 3). They further suggest that the neuro-
physiological mechanisms underlying human speech processing
evolved from similar mechanisms in our nonhuman primate an-
cestors.

In sum, research demonstrates a striking number of continu-
ities – in behavior, perception, cognition, and neurophysiology –
between human speech and the vocal communication of nonhu-
man primates. Nonhuman primate vocal communication does not
qualify as language, but it does exhibit many of the characteristics
that one would expect to find if human language had evolved from
the vocal communication and cognition of the common ancestor
of human and nonhuman primates.

Arbib cites none of this research. As a result, his presentation is
strongly biased in favor of his own view that the emergence of hu-
man speech “owes little to nonhuman vocalizations” (target arti-
cle, Abstract). To accept the convoluted hypothesis that spoken
language evolved from vocalizations, through gestures, then back
to vocalizations again, one must first have good reason to reject the
simpler hypothesis that spoken language evolved from prelinguis-
tic vocal communication. A substantial body of data argues against
such a rejection.

Making a case for mirror-neuron system
involvement in language development: What
about autism and blindness?

Hugo Théoreta and Shirley Fecteaub
aDepartement de Psychologie, Université de Montréal, Centre Ville, Montreal,
Qc H3C 3J7, Canada; bFaculté de Médecine, Université de Montréal, Centre
Ville, Montreal, Qc, H3C 3J7, Canada. hugo.theoret@umontreal.ca
shirley.fecteau@umontreal.ca

Abstract: The notion that manual gestures played an important role in the
evolution of human language was strengthened by the discovery of mirror
neurons in monkey area F5, the proposed homologue of human Broca’s
area. This idea is central to the thesis developed by Arbib, and lending fur-
ther  support  to  a  link  between  motor  resonance  mechanisms  and  lan-
guage/communication development is the case of autism and congenital
blindness. We provide an account of how these conditions may relate to
the aforementioned theory.

Arbib presents a strong argument in favor of a link between mir-
ror neurons (MN), imitation, and the development of human lan-
guage. We endorse his thesis that a protolanguage based on man-
ual gestures was a precursor to human language as we know it
today. Additional support for this claim comes from two seemingly
different conditions: autism and congenital blindness.

Autism. Language and communication deficits are one of the
defining features of autism spectrum disorders (ASD; American
Psychiatric Association 1994) and are core elements of their diag-
nosis and prognosis (Herbert et al. 2002; Ventner et al. 1992). Par-
ticularly  relevant  is  the  fact  that  these  impairments  are  more
prominent in pragmatic speech associated with social communi-
cation (Tager-Flusberg 1997). Interestingly, individuals with ASD
also display well-documented deficits in imitative behavior (e.g.,
Avikainen  et  al.  2003).  Recent  magnetoencephalographic  data
suggest that an abnormal mirror-neuron system (MNS) may un-
derlie the imitative impairment observed in individuals with ASD
(Nishitani et al. 2004). That study reported imitation-related ab-
normalities in Broca’s area and its contralateral homologue, the
human equivalent of monkey area F5, where most MN are found
(Rizzolatti & Craighero 2004).

The idea that imitative abilities, and possibly language impair-
ments, are related to basic MN dysfunction in ASD was recently
investigated in our laboratory. In line with the MN hypothesis of
ASD (Williams et al. 2001), motor cortex activation during the ob-
servation of simple finger movements was found to be significantly
weaker in individuals with ASD compared to matched controls
(Théoret et al. 2005). The MNS/language disorder hypothesis is
also  supported  by  the  fact  that  individuals  with  autism  display
structural  abnormalities  in  Broca’s  area  (Herbert  et  al.  2002).
Other symptoms that may be associated in some way with MN
dysfunction in ASD include abnormal eye gaze, theory-of-mind
deficits, the use of other’s hands to communicate or demand, hand
mannerisms, repetitive behaviors, and echolalia.

Taken together, these data support Arbib’s main argument that
a simple action observation/execution matching mechanism an-
chored in area F5 (Broca’s area in humans) may have evolved into
a complex system subserving human language. Consequently, a
pathological, congenital dysfunction of the mirror-cell system in
humans would be expected to dramatically affect social interac-
tions and language/communication as a result of gesture/speech
interpretation and acquisition. This appears to be the case in ASD.
As mentioned by Arbib, Broca’s is not the only area making up the
human language and MNS. It is thus possible that other regions
within the MNS underlie some intact language skills in some ASD
individuals (e.g., grammar and syntax), which could in turn partly
account for the heterogeneity of the symptoms across individuals.
To that effect, the case of individuals with ASD and normal IQ
is particularly relevant to the argument put forth by Arbib. In that
population, it is the social and pragmatic aspects of language that
are  usually  impaired,  with  some  individuals  displaying  normal
abilities in, for example, vocabulary and syntax. It appears that ab-

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

145

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

normal imitation-related cortical activations in ASD with normal
IQ are located mostly within the inferior frontal gyrus as opposed
to the superior temporal sulcus and inferior parietal lobule (Nishi-
tani et al. 2004). In light of these neurophysiological results, it may
be that modularity of the MNS can account for differential lan-
guage symptomatology, with Broca’s area being the principal com-
ponent of the system.

Blindness. Another pathological condition that may add some
insight into the perspective offered by Arbib is congenital blind-
ness. It has been suggested that congenitally blind individuals dis-
play autism-like characteristics (Hobson & Bishop 2003). For ex-
ample,  visually  impaired  children  perform  at  lower  levels  than
normal subjects on theory-of-mind tasks (Minter et al. 1998), and
blind children are at an increased risk of meeting diagnostic cri-
teria for autism (Brown et al. 1997). Interpretation of these data
as  suggesting  a  causal  link  between  sensory  deprivation  and
autism-like  characteristics  has  been  challenged  (Baron-Cohen
2002), but they nevertheless bring to mind interesting questions
regarding ASD, MN function, and language impairment.

Some blind children display fewer periods in which they direct
language towards other children and are generally impaired in the
social and pragmatic aspects of language (Hobson & Bishop 2003),
reminiscent of individuals with ASD. In blind individuals, lack of
visual input would derail the normal mechanism matching action
perception and execution within the visual system. A motor reso-
nance mechanism could still operate through the auditory modal-
ity (Kohler et al. 2002), but in an obviously limited manner due to
lack of visual input.

Mechanisms of disorder. We have tried to describe two patho-
logical conditions that offer insight into the role of the MNS in lan-
guage/communication. We have showed that a breakdown in MN
function may be associated with specific language impairments,
most notably pragmatic speech. In contrast to the theory put forth
by Arbib, these examples speak to the ontogeny, rather than the
phylogeny, of language. Nevertheless, they share a striking simi-
larity: the necessity of an adequately “evolved” (as Arbib puts it)
MNS to develop the unique ability of human language. Although
still speculative, the two conditions we have described suggest dif-
ferent mechanisms that may lead to MNS impairment and associ-
ated language deficits.

In the case of blindness, it may be that loss of visual input im-
pairs  the  normal  development  of  a  motor  resonance  system,
thereby  leading  to  language/communication  deficits.  In  that
sense, it is an environmental factor that hinders adequate devel-
opment of the MNS. In ASD, where genetic factors are an im-
portant part of the etiology, individuals may be born with a dys-
functional MNS, preventing normal language and social behavior.
In  that  regard,  it  is  tempting  to  look  at  the  Forkhead  box  P2
(FOXP2) gene, located on chromosome 7q, which is believed to
be implicated in the acquisition of language (Lai et al. 2001) and
may be involved in the human properties of the MNS (Corballis
2004). Most evidence argues against a direct link between autism
and FOXP2 (e.g., Newbury et al. 2002), but the idea that MN de-
velopment may be genetically determined is an intriguing possi-
bility that requires further investigation.

In summary, this commentary highlights the need to test Arbib’s
theory against various pathological conditions, either those spe-
cific to language (e.g., aphasia) or those which may be associated
with  MN  dysfunction  (autism,  schizophrenia,  Williams’  syn-
drome). For example, one of the co-morbidities of specific lan-
guage  impairment  (SLI)  is  motor  impairment  (Hill  2001),  sug-
gesting yet another association between motor skill and language
dysfunction. It seems obvious to us that specific predictions of Ar-
bib’s model need to be tested this way, as direct evidence in sup-
port of some aspects of the theory is lacking.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This commentary was supported by grants from the National Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada and the Fonds de Recherche en
Santé du Québec.

146

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

Language is fundamentally a social affair

Justin H. G. Williams
Department of Child Health, University of Aberdeen School of Medicine,
Royal Aberdeen Children’s Hospital, Aberdeen AB25 2ZG, Scotland,
United Kingdom. justin.Williams@abdn.ac.uk
http://www.abdn.ac.uk/child_health/williams.hti

Abstract: Perhaps the greatest evolutionary advantage conferred by spo-
ken language was its ability to communicate mentalistic concepts, rather
than just extending the vocabulary of action already served by an imitation
function. An appreciation that the mirror-neuron system served a simple
mentalising function before gestural communication sets Arbib’s theory in
a more appropriate social cognitive context.

It may not be an obvious question to ask why spoken language
should evolve from gestural communication, but it is an important
one. Simply put, if gesture can be used to communicate effec-
tively, why evolve speech? Why didn’t we just evolve a complex
gesturing language that did not require changes to the larynx? Ar-
bib has presented a theory of language evolution but has omitted
to discuss the selection pressures involved.

According to the Machiavellian intelligence hypothesis (Byrne
& Whiten 1988; Whiten & Byrne 1997), the human brain evolved
because of the selection pressure to develop cognitive capacities
that  facilitate  social  manoeuvring.  This  would  also  suggest  that
language evolved through the need to communicate mental states.
The evolution of language would be driven primarily by the need
to discuss matters such as loyalty, betrayal, forgiveness, and re-
venge. Arbib uses few examples to illustrate the content of the lan-
guage he is discussing; he mentions gestures used to describe fly-
ing birds, hunters directing each other, the tastes of food, and the
use  of  fire  to  cook  meat.  His  argument  seems  to  assume  that
speech and gesture are used to discuss the physical activities of
daily living, rather than to express feelings, desires, or intentions,
or to consider the thoughts of conspecifics.

Also, Arbib derives his model of imitation from that proposed
by Byrne and Russon (1998) following their observations of leaf-
folding by mountain gorillas. This is an imitative task that requires
replicating the structural organisation of an action, rather than the
mental states driving it. Communicating the knowledge inherent
to  this  skill  is  a  relatively  straightforward  matter  using  action
demonstration, whereas to describe it using only speech would be
more difficult. Conversely, communication concerning invisible
mental states may lend itself more to speech than descriptive ges-
ture. Consider for example, “John wrongly thinks that Bob is jeal-
ous of me,” or, “you distract John whilst I plot revenge against
Bob.” It may be that in the discussion of invisible mental states,
speech can add a valuable modality of communication, which may
even supplant manual and facial gesture.

Arbib does not mention the possible role of the mirror-neuron
system in mentalising, or the importance of this mentalising func-
tion in imitation. Imitation involves incorporating a novel action
into a pre-existing behavioural repertoire (Whiten et al. 2004). It
follows that for this to occur, the observed behaviour must be com-
pared with the existing knowledge of the behaviour. Therefore, im-
itation requires more than remembering and then replicating the
components and organisational structure of an action sequence.
Rather, imitation requires that the observer draw on his or her own
knowledge of an action exhibited by a model. This includes the ob-
server’s knowledge of the action’s relationships to causes, beliefs,
goals, desires, effects, and agency. Only then can the observer un-
derstand the role of the action in the model’s behaviour.

Actions are therefore vehicles for the thoughts that shape them,
in that thoughts are carried by actions from mind to mind. Both im-
itation and “simulation theory of mind” involve observing actions
or behaviours from a stance of using self-knowledge to predict the
mental states behind them (Meltzoff & Decety 2003). This means
that both “theory of mind” and imitation depend on relating per-
ceived actions to their motor counterparts (Meltzoff & Prinz 2002).
The  mirror-neuron  system  is  the  prime  candidate  to  serve  this

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

function (Gallese & Goldman 1998), not as the only component,
but by providing the original action-perception links that constitute
the evolutionary origins and the developmental core for social cog-
nitive growth. I suggest that it is the capacity of the mirror-neuron
system to represent an observed action as if it were the behaviour
associated with a self-generated mental state, thereby allowing for
attribution of intention (and a secondary representational capacity;
see Suddendorf & Whiten [2001]), rather than its capacity for cod-
ing an action’s organisational structure, which enabled the mirror-
neuron system to serve highly flexible imitation and praxis.

The neurodevelopmental disorder of autism is characterised by
major  developmental  impairment  of  social  cognitive  ability,  in-
cluding imitative and mentalising abilities. Another characteristic
feature, that is highly discriminative diagnostically, is the reduced
use of all gestures, whether descriptive, instrumental, emphatic,
or facial (Lord et al. 2000). This suggests that the neural system in
humans serving gestural communication is knitted to that serving
other social cognition (Williams et al. 2001). Whether dysfunc-
tional mirror-neuron systems account for this symptom cluster is
still a matter for research, but it seems unlikely that during evolu-
tion, language became more divorced from social cognitive sys-
tems once it became spoken. Indeed spoken language can become
divorced from social cognition in autism, when it may be repeti-
tive, stereotyped, and pragmatically impaired, such that its com-
municative function is severely impaired. If language did evolve
only as Arbib describes, it could be impaired in a similar manner.
I suggest that the evolution of language from object-directed
imitation would have been intimately tied to the evolution of so-
cial communication at the neural level. During early hominid evo-
lution,  the  representations  being  pantomimed  through  gestural
communication  (including  facial  expression)  would  have  been
concerned with mental states, including feelings and desires. Fa-
cial and manual gestures were being used by individuals to express
both their own feelings and what they thought others were feel-
ing. The neural systems serving these functions would form the
basis  for  the  communication  of  more  complex  mental  states,
which would recruit vocal and auditory systems as well as seman-
tic and planning structures in temporal and frontal lobes.

In summary, I suggest that mirror neurons first evolved within
social cognitive neural systems to serve a mentalising function that
was crucial to their praxic role in imitation and gestural commu-
nication. As the evolution of social language was driven through
the need to convey and discuss invisible mental states, and these
became  increasingly  complex,  so  a  vocal-auditory  modality  be-
came  recruited  as  an  increasingly  valuable  additional  means  of
communication.  This  extended,  rather  than  altered,  the  funda-
mentally social nature and function of language, and maintained
its  dependence  upon  social  cognitive  mechanisms  such  as  sec-
ondary representation.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am grateful to Thomas Suddendorf and Nina Dick-Williams for com-
ments on an earlier draft of this commentary.

The explanatory advantages of the holistic
protolanguage model: The case of linguistic
irregularity

Alison Wray
Centre for Language and Communication Research, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, CF10 3XB, Wales, United Kingdom. wraya@cf.ac.uk
http://www.cf.ac.uk/encap/staff/wray.html

Abstract: Our tolerance for, and promotion of, linguistic irregularity is a
key arbitrator between Arbib’s proposal that holistic protolanguage pre-
ceded culturally imposed compositionality, and the standard view that dis-
crete units with word-like properties came first. The former, coupled with
needs-only analysis, neatly accounts for the second-order linguistic com-

plexity that is rationalised as fuzzy grammaticality, subclass exception, and
full irregularity.

Any model of language evolution must explain four basic things:
1. The interface between real-world semantics and the arbi-
trary phonetic medium: a difficult problem, particularly if sub-
cortical reflex vocalisations are not the precursor of speech;

2. The capacity for fast and fluent formulations of phonologi-
cal strings, since this has no obvious purpose beyond language it-
self (unless for display);

3. Our ability to express and understand messages that juxta-

pose many separate meaning features; and

4. Why languages appear to be unnecessarily complex, relative

to the perceived underlying simple rule systems.

Arbib’s integrated model offers an explanation for the first three
by identifying manual dexterity and imitation, exapted for pan-
tomimic communication, as the conduit between holistic message
and oral articulation. Associating Broca’s area first with grasping
and imitation is much more satisfactory than attributing to it an a
priori involvement in language that must then be independently
explained. Indeed, in line with Arbib’s section 8, neurolinguistic
and clinical evidence strongly suggests that linguistic representa-
tion in the brain is mapped on the principle of functional motiva-
tion,  so  language  operations  are  expected  to  be  distributed  ac-
cording to their primary functions or derivation (Wray 2002a, Ch.
14).1

However, Arbib’s model also indirectly offers an explanation for
point 4. In Arbib’s scenario, complex meaning existed in holistic
expressions before there was a way of isolating and recombining
units. The subsequent application of what Arbib terms “fraction-
ation” (“segmentation” for Peters [1983], who identified the pro-
cess  in  first  language  acquisition)  is  viewed  as  culturally  rather
than  biologically  determined,  and  consequently,  piecemeal  and
circumstantial rather than uniform and universal.

On what basis should we favour this proposal over the standard
alternative (e.g., Bickerton 1996), that there have always been dis-
crete units with word-like properties, which became combinable
to create meaning, first agrammatically (protolanguage) and later
grammatically? First, we can note that attributing to our biologi-
cally modern ancestors a default capacity for holistic rather than
compositional expression, begs the question: Where is that holis-
tic foundation now? Wray (2002a) demonstrates that holistic pro-
cessing, far from being peripheral and inconsequential, is in fact
alive and well and motivating much of our everyday linguistic be-
haviour.2

But I want to focus mainly on one linguistic phenomenon that
has long caused puzzlement and demanded much explanatory ef-
fort: irregularity. It is surely a necessary corollary of the standard
view of language as an ab initio combinatory system that we are
predisposed to orderliness, and that unnecessary complexity and
irregularity  are  an  aberrance  to  be  minimised  rather  than  pro-
moted or protected. Hence, first, we should find that languages
attempt to cleanse themselves of phonological and morphological
exceptions, oddities in patterns of lexical collocation, grammatical
restrictions  of  the  sort  that  demand  subcategorisations  of  word
classes, and lexical gaps. For instance, we would expect the up-
grading of adjective subsets that cannot occur predicatively (*The
objection is principal) and attributively (*the asleep boy), and the
filling of gaps in lexical sets, for example, horror/horrid/horrify,
terror/*terrid/terrify,  candor/candid/*candify (Chomsky  1965,
p. 186). Such cleansing does not generally occur. Most irregular-
ity is preserved intact from one generation to the next. Although
regularisation does happen at the margins, it is balanced by the
creation of new irregularities (see below).

Second, children acquiring an L1 that is fully regular and trans-
parent, such as Esperanto, ought to do so efficiently and perfectly.
However, they do not (Bergen 2001). Instead, they introduce (ap-
parently permanently) irregularities and sub-patterns that render
complex the simple system of the input.

Third, if native speakers naturally develop a full compositional

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

147

Commentary/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

linguistic system during first language acquisition, we should ex-
pect their writing to reflect that system from the start. This, too,
is not the case. In semi-literates, Fairman (e.g., 2000) reports taket
(take it), in form (inform), a quaint (acquaint) and B four (before).
Guillaume (1927/1973) offers semy (c’est mis), a bitant (habitant),
a ses (assez) and dé colle (d’école). Thus is speech transcribed with
strikingly  little  awareness  of  the  grammatical  or  morphological
components that are supposedly being freely manipulated.

All of these oddities are readily explained if humans are predis-
posed to treat input and output holistically where they can, and to
engage in linguistic analysis only to the extent demanded by ex-
pressive  need  (rather  than  a  principle  of  system)  – needs-only
analysis (NOA; Wray 2002a, pp. 130–32). Coupled with a parsi-
monious approach to pattern identification, NOA will:

a) Prevent the deconstruction of linguistic material that is no

longer morphologically active, thus preserving irregularity;

b) Fence off combinations that are regular but are not observed
to be subject to paradigmatic variation, and maintain them as com-
plete units that cannot be generalised to other cases (as with the
L1 acquisition of Esperanto); in so doing, protect the units from
subsequent linguistic change, so they drift over time through fuzzy
semi-regularity to full irregularity;

c) Support, in those who do not subsequently augment their
fuzzy, half-formed linguistic system with formal training through
literacy, a tolerance for underspecification and an absence of any
expectation that language is fully composed of atomic lexical units.
The bizarre spellings of semi-literates reflect a direct link between
the whole meaning and its phonological form.

In addition, the fractionation of a holistic expression may often
result in a “remainder” of phonological material that cannot be at-
tributed a plausible meaning or function. Yet, because of (a) and
(c), there may well never be a point when that material demands
rationalisation  – until  the  grammarian  attempts  to  explain  it  in
terms of a system it actually stands outside. Unless by haphazard
or imposed hypercorrection, such irregular remainders may never
be expunged and, although vulnerable to certain kinds of change,
may persist in the long term, to the puzzlement of analysts (Wray
2002a) and frustration of adult language learners (Wray 2004).

Therefore, I contend that linguistic irregularity is a source of
support  for  Arbib’s  proposal  that  compositionality  is  a  choice
rather than a fundamental in human language, and that its appli-
cation is variable not absolute. Some aspects of what syntacticians
are obliged to account for via complex rules may be no more than
detritus from the process of fractionising unprincipled phonolog-
ical strings.

If this is so, our challenge, before all the endangered languages
disappear, is to recast our assumptions about prehistorical norms,
by establishing what the “natural” balance is between composi-
tionality and formulaicity in the absence of literacy and formal ed-
ucation. Many “fundamentals,” such as the word, full classificatory
potential, and inherent regularly of pattern, may come down to
culture-centricity (Grace 2002) and the long-standing uneasy at-
tempt to squeeze square pegs into the round holes of prevailing
linguistic theory.

NOTES

1. This position easily supports Arbib’s hypothesis (sect. 1.2) that there
would be an extralinguistic human correlate of the primate mirror system
for subcortical reflex vocalisations.

2. It was on the basis of this evidence that I first proposed a holistic pro-
tolanguage (Wray 1998; 2000; 2002b), but we avoid circularity since Arbib
does not in any sense build his own story upon my proposal, he only cites
it as an independently developed account consistent with his own.

148

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

Language evolution: Body of evidence?

Chen Yua and Dana H. Ballardb
aDepartment of Psychology and Cognitive Science Program, Indiana
University, Bloomington, IN 47405; bDepartment of Computer Science,
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627. chenyu@indiana.edu
dana@cs.rochester.edu
http://www.cs.rochester.edu/~dana/

http://www.indiana.edu/~dll/

Abstract: Our computational studies of infant language learning estimate
the inherent difficulty of Arbib’s proposal. We show that body language
provides a strikingly helpful scaffold for learning language that may be
necessary but not sufficient, given the absence of sophisticated language
in  other  species.  The  extraordinary  language  abilities  of  Homo  sapiens
must have evolved from other pressures, such as sexual selection.

Arbib’s article provides a complete framework showing how hu-
mans,  but  not  monkeys,  have  language-ready  brains.  A  center-
piece in hominid language evolution is based on the recognition
and  production  of  body  movements,  particularly  hand  move-
ments, and their explicit representation in the brain, termed the
mirror property.

How can we evaluate this proposal? One way is to take a look at
infant language learning. The human infant has evolved to be lan-
guage-ready, but nonetheless, examining the steps to competency
in detail can shed light on the constraints that evolution had to deal
with. In a manner similar to language evolution, the speaker (lan-
guage teacher) and the listener (language learner) need to share
the meanings of words in a language during language acquisition.
A central issue in human word learning is the mapping problem –
how to discover correct word-meaning pairs from multiple co-oc-
currences between words and things in an environment, which is
termed reference uncertainty by Quine (1960). Our work in Yu et
al. (2003) and Yu and Ballard (2004) shows that body movements
play a crucial role in addressing the word-to-world mapping prob-
lem, and the body’s momentary disposition in space can be used
to infer referential intentions in speech.

By testing human subjects and comparing their performances
in different learning conditions, we find that inference of speak-
ers’ intentions from their body movements, which we term em-
bodied intentions, facilitates both word discovery and word-mean-
ing  association.  In  light  of  these  empirical  findings,  we  have
developed a computational model that can identify the sound pat-
terns of individual words from continuous speech using nonlin-
guistic contextual information and can employ body movements
as deictic references to discover word-meaning associations. As a
complementary study in language learning, we argue that one piv-
otal function of a language-ready brain is to utilize temporal cor-
relations  among  language,  perception,  and  action  to  bootstrap
early word learning. Although language evolution and language
acquisition are usually treated as different topics, the consistency
of the findings from both Arbib’s work and our work does show a
strong link between body and language. Moreover, it suggests that
the discoveries in language evolution and those in language ac-
quisition can potentially provide some insightful thoughts to each
other.

Language  (even  protolanguage)  is  about  symbols,  and  those
symbols must be grounded so that they can be used to refer to a
class of objects, actions, or events. To tackle the evolutionary prob-
lem of the origins of language, Arbib argues that language readi-
ness  evolved  as  a  multimodal  system  and  supported  intended
communication. Our work confirms Arbib’s hypothesis and shows
that a language-ready brain is able to learn words by utilizing tem-
poral synchrony between speech and referential body movements
to infer referents in speech, which leads us to ask an intriguing
question: How can the mirror system proposed by Arbib provide
a neurological basis for a language learner to use body cues in lan-
guage learning?

Our studies show quantitatively how body cues that signal in-
tention could aid infant language learning. Such intentional body
movements with accompanying visual information provide a nat-

Response/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

ural learning environment for infants to facilitate linguistic pro-
cessing. Audio, visual, and body movement data were collected si-
multaneously. The non-speech inputs of the learning system con-
sisted of visual data, and head and hand positions in concert with
eye gaze data. The possible meanings of spoken words were en-
coded  in  this  nonlinguistic  context,  and  the  goal  was  to  extract
those meanings from raw sensory inputs. Our method first utilized
eye and head movements as cues to estimate the speaker’s focus
of attention. At every attentional point in time, eye gaze was used
as deictic reference (Ballard et al. 1997) to find the attentional ob-
ject from all the objects in a scene, and each object was repre-
sented  by  a  perceptual  feature  consisting  of  color,  texture,  and
shape features. As a result, we obtained a temporal sequence of
possible referents.

Next, a partitioning mechanism categorized spoken utterances
represented  by  phoneme  sequences  into  several  meaning  bins,
and an expectation-maximization algorithm was employed to find
the reliable associations of spoken words and their perceptually
grounded  meanings.  Detailed  descriptions  of  machine  learning
techniques  can  be  obtained  from  Yu  and  Ballard  (2004).  The
learning result is that this system can learn more than 85 percent
of  the  correct  word-meaning  associations  accurately,  given  that
the word has been segmented. Considering that the system pro-
cesses raw sensory data, and our learning method works in unsu-
pervised mode without manually encoding any linguistic informa-
tion, this level of performance is impressive.

Such results are very consistent with Arbib’s proposal that these
body constraints served to start language development on an evo-
lutionary scale. However, this leaves unanswered the question of
why Homo sapiens evolved without language. Arbib’s argument
seems to be that if a plausible sequence of steps is laid out, and
the  “height”  or  difficulty  in  transiting  each  step  is  small,  then
somehow  evolution  should  have  been  compelled  to  follow  this
path. But our sequence of steps in the model of infant language
learning also has small steps – recognize body movements, recog-
nize intentions as communicated with body movements, recog-
nize attentional objects in a scene, recognize the sounds that ac-
company these movements. These steps would be accessible for a
variety of social species, and yet they were traversed only by hu-
mans.

Arbib makes special use of the hand representations, suggest-
ing that perhaps humans had an edge in this category that pro-
vided the needed leverage. This is again very plausible, yet our
studies show that you can get quite far just by hanging sounds on
the end of the eye fixations and hand movements. From our point
of  view,  any  animal  species  that  could  communicate  intention
through body movement had the possibility of developing some
kind of language. Hence, it is likely that some other constraints
must be brought into play to account for the uniqueness of lan-
guage in humans. Surprisingly, Arbib does not mention Miller’s
hypothesis that language is a product of sexual selection. Miller
(2001) argues that the human brain must have been the kind of
runaway process driven by sexual selection in a similar manner to
Bower bird’s nests and peacock’s tails. Miller’s arguments are ex-
tensively developed and show how Homo sapiens could have got-
ten a jump start on very similar species with very similar brain ar-
chitectures.

Author’s Response

The mirror system hypothesis stands but the
framework is much enriched

http://www-hbp.usc.edu/

Michael A. Arbib
Computer Science Department, Neuroscience Program and USC Brain
Project, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089-2520.
arbib@pollux.usc.edu
Abstract: Challenges for extending the mirror system hypothesis
include mechanisms supporting planning, conversation, motiva-
tion, theory of mind, and prosody. Modeling remains relevant. Co-
speech gestures show how manual gesture and speech intertwine,
but more attention is needed to the auditory system and phonol-
ogy. The holophrastic view of protolanguage is debated, along with
semantics and the cultural basis of grammars. Anatomically sepa-
rated regions may share an evolutionary history.

R1. Introduction

R1.1. The commentaries in perspective
The original mirror system hypothesis (MSH) states that:
H1. The parity requirement for language in humans is
met because Broca’s area evolved atop the mirror system
for grasping with its capacity to generate and recognize a
set of actions.
The target article (TA) goes beyond MSH to distinguish
a language-ready brain (equipping the child to learn a lan-
guage) from a brain that “has” language (in the sense of,
e.g., an innate “principles and parameters” universal gram-
mar) and then to assert that:

H2. Language readiness evolved as a multimodal man-
ual/facial/vocal system with protosign providing the scaf-
folding  for  protospeech  – these  then  co-evolved  in  an 
expanding spiral to provide “neural critical mass” for pro-
tolanguage

and further that:

H3.  Protolanguage  was  holophrastic  – “protowords”
were semantically more akin to phrases or sentences of
modern language than words “as we know them.”

H4.  Biological  evolution  gave  humans  a  language-
ready  brain,  but  the  emergence  of  human  languages
from protolanguage was a matter of history, not biology.
H5. Whereas the original MSH focused on macaque
F5 and Broca’s area, F5 is part of a larger F5-PF-STS sys-
tem in the macaque, and this “lifts” to a larger frontal-
parietal-temporal language-ready system in the human
brain.
Among them, H2 to H5 constitute an extended MSH.
What needs stressing is that these four hypotheses are al-
most independent – and thus each must stand on its own.
My response to the commentaries is grouped as follows:

Section R2 shows that complex imitation must be com-
plemented by planning (R2.1) and viewed in developmen-
tal perspective (R2.2).

Section R3 generally endorses the role of the mirror sys-

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

149

Response/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

tem in evolution of the language-ready brain, but mecha-
nisms  supporting  conversation  (R3.1),  motivation  (R3.2),
and theory of mind (R3.3) must also be taken into account.
Section  R4  considers  lessons  from  modeling  biological
neural networks (4.1) and evolving artificial networks (R4.2).
Section R5 reviews the debate over the claim (H2) that
the  path  to  protospeech  was  indirect.  Discussion  of  co-
speech gestures (R5.1) shows how strongly manual gesture
and  speech  are  intertwined.  Future  work  must  factor  in
new data on the auditory system (R5.2). Data on primate
vocalization challenge H2 but do not topple it (R5.3). How-
ever, any claim that protosign had a large head start (if any)
on protospeech in the expanding spiral is questionable. The
challenge of evolving a phonological system remains (R5.4).
Section R6 discusses the transition from protolanguage
to language with special attention to the debate on H3, the
holophrastic view of language (R6.1). Issues on bringing se-
mantics into MSH (R6.2) are followed by a brief discussion
of H4, emphasizing the cultural basis of grammars (R6.3).
Section R7 revisits the overview in Figure 6 of the TA.
Unfortunately, the figure was mentioned only in one com-
mentary and then only in passing, but I discuss commen-
tary  relevant  to  the  issues  of  whether  anatomically  sepa-
rated regions may share an evolutionary history (R7.1) and
how  action  planning  supplements  mirror  systems  in  lan-
guage evolution (R7.2).

In addition to the commentaries published here in this
issue,  I  had  the  privilege  of  receiving  equally  fine  com-
mentaries  from  Yoonsuck  Choe;  Jean-Louis  Dessalles  &
Laleh Ghadakpour; Peter Dominey; James Hurford; Masao
Ito; David Kemmerer; Takaki Makino, Kotaro Hirayama &
Kazuyuki Aihara (Makino et al.); Emese Nagy; Massimo Pi-
attelli-Palmarini  &  Thomas  Bever;  Friedemann  Pulver-
müller;  Andreas  Rogalewski,  Andreas  Jansen,  Ann-Freya
Foerster,  Stefan  Knecht,  &  Caterina  Breitenstein  (Ro-
galewski et al.); Martin Ruchsow; Markus Werning; and Pa-
tricia Zukow-Goldring. These commentaries are posted on
the BBSOnline Web site and have been given a fuller Au-
thor’s Response. The supplemental commentaries with Au-
thor’s  Response  are  retrievable  at  the  following  URL:
http://www.bbsonline.org/Preprints/Arbib-05012002/
Supplemental/. I am particularly grateful to the many com-
mentators whose correspondence allowed me to more fully
understand the issues they raised. I cannot do justice to this
“conversation” in 10,000 words here, but hope to develop
many of the issues in Beyond the Mirror: Biology and Cul-
ture in the Evolution of Brain and Language, which I am cur-
rently preparing for publication by Oxford University Press.
I use boldface for commentators’ names when respond-
ing to the present published commentaries and italic when
discussing (more briefly) the supplemental ones. A com-
mentator’s name followed by the notation (p.c.) refers to the
follow-up correspondence (personal communication), not
the original commentary.

R1.2. Et cetera
A  number  of  interesting  points  do  not  fit  into  the  above
framework:

R1.2.1. Birds and others. Pepperberg applies my criteria
for language readiness to the behavior of the Grey parrot,
Alex, that she has taught to communicate with humans us-

150

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

ing rudiments of English speech. Despite the lack of strong
neural homologies between parrots, songbirds (Doupe &
Kuhl 1999), and primates, we may still hope to model rele-
vant  circuitry  (R4)  to  better  understand  what  allows  a
neural network to achieve different language-related func-
tions. Fitch notes that some species may have vocal but not
bodily imitation, and vice versa. This is irrelevant to MSH,
which  asserts  that  humans  had  a  particular  history.  This
does not deny that comparative study of neural mechanisms
underlying different forms of imitation may help us better
understand the workings of the human brain – though the
closer the homology, the more likely the payoff.

Pepperberg’s assertion that little about my criteria for
language readiness is unique to humans seems a blow to my
claim to characterize what allows human children to learn
“full language” where other species cannot. Perhaps there
are differences of degree: for example, Alex does not meet
my full criteria for “complex imitation.” What enriches the
discussion is that chimpanzees raised in a human environ-
ment can exhibit far more “protolanguage” than their wild
cousins – observing animals in the wild does not define the
limits of complexity of their behavior.

R1.2.2. Lateralization. Kaplan & Iacoboni show that mo-
tor  activation  to  sight  of  an  action  is  typically  bilateral,
whereas action sounds activate the motor cortex only in the
left hemisphere. This may be related to evolutionary pro-
cesses  that  lateralized  language.  Since  lateralization  has
been debated extensively in BBS (Vol. 26, No. 2, Corballis
2003a), I will not comment here (but see R5.3) beyond the
observation  that,  because  children  who  receive  a  hemi-
spherectomy early enough can gain fairly good command of
language (though comprehension of syntax does show some
left-hemisphere superiority [Dennis & Kohn 1975]), later-
alization would seem to be not so much the genetic speci-
fication  of  different  kinds  of  circuitry  in  the  two  hemi-
spheres as a developmental bias which favors, but does not
force, differential development of skills there.

R1.2.3. Sexual selection. Yu & Ballard cite the hypothe-
sis that language is a product of sexual selection. I am un-
able  to  evaluate  this  hypothesis,  but  raise  two  questions:
Does sexual selection function differently in early hominids
and  early  great  apes?  Why  does  it  not  yield  stronger  di-
morphism between male and female language use?

R1.2.4. Genetic underpinnings. Théoret & Fecteau note
attempts to implicate the FOXP2 gene in language. How-
ever, FOXP2 is implicated in many systems, from the gut to
the basal ganglia. It has been argued that because the gene
changed only once from mouse to our common ancestor
with the great apes but changed twice in the hominid line,
it may hold the key to what distinguishes us from the great
apes. However, the mutation of the gene seen in a number
of members of the family KE does not reverse the two “re-
cent”  mutations  to  yield  humans  with  a  chimpanzee-like
FOXP2 gene. The KE language deficits seem more a func-
tion of motor problems than proving a causal relation be-
tween changes in FOXP2 and the evolution of the language-
ready brain (Corballis 2004). Pepperberg’s description of
the use of expression of the ZENK gene to form a functional
map of avian brains for behavior related both to auditory
processing and vocal production and the coupling of this to

Response/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

neurophysiology, provides an encouraging model for future
studies in macaques.

R2. Complex imitation

R2.1. Complex imitation and planning
I hypothesize that the mirror system for grasping evolved in
two stages: first to provide feedback for dexterous manual
control,  then  to  underwrite  the  ability  to  act  with  other
brain regions to make information available for interacting
with others. Makino, Hirayama & Aihara (Makino et al.)
observe that success in complex imitation requires the abil-
ity to recognize the goal of an action as the basis for mas-
tering the action which achieves that goal. Indeed, Arbib
and Rizzolatti (1997) gave the equation Action  ⫽ Move-
ment ⫹ Goal, and the mirror neurons system (MNS) model
recognizes an action in terms of the goal of successful grasp-
ing of an affordance. Complex imitation takes us further. It
rests on recognizing how different actions fit together to
achieve various subgoals of the overall goal.

Bickerton and Prudkov assert that there cannot be im-
itation unless someone has first created something to imi-
tate, and that mirror neurons offer no clue as to how totally
novel  sequences  could  have  been  created.  Actually,  new
skills can emerge by trial and error. The problem is to pre-
serve them. The data on chimpanzee cultures (Whiten et
al. 2001) show how few skills chimpanzees acquire. I sug-
gest  that  it  is  complex  imitation  that  enables  humans  to
move beyond such limited repertoires, cumulatively ratch-
eting up the available stock of novel skills.

Complex imitation presupposes a capacity for complex
action  analysis  – the  ability  to  analyze  another’s  perfor-
mance as a combination of actions (approximated by vari-
ants of) actions already in the repertoire. In modern hu-
mans,  imitation  undergirds  the  child’s  ability  to  acquire
language, whereas complex action analysis is essential for
the adult’s ability to comprehend the novel assemblage of
“articulatory gestures” that constitute each utterance of a
language. However, the adult does not imitate this assem-
blage but rather factors it into the planning of his reply. I
agree with Bridgeman that mirror systems must be sup-
plemented by a planning capability to create, store, and ex-
ecute plans for sequences of actions and communicatory
acts. These apparent sequences are the expression of hier-
archical structures. In Figure 5 of the TA, interpretation of
actions of others is coupled to planning of one’s own actions;
Bridgeman stresses the need for the complementary evo-
lution of these two capabilities. They underlie perception
grammars and production grammars, mentioned in discus-
sion of Figure 1 of the TA.

Bickerton observes that when someone addresses you,
you do not just imitate what they said. True. The human
mirror system creates a representation that can be used for
feedback control, imitation (which monkeys do not exhibit),
or generating some appropriate response while inhibiting
mimicking. Only in pathology does this inhibition fail, yield-
ing compulsive imitation (echopraxia; Podell et al. 2001).

R2.2. Imitation in developmental perspective
Zukow-Goldring sees  affordances  and  effectivities  (what
the body can do; Shaw & Turvey 1981) as two sides of the

mirror system. By directing the child’s attention to its own
effectivities  in  relation  to  affordances,  the  caregiver  nar-
rows the search space for learning, and thus enhances that
learning (Zukow-Goldring 1996). These practices may pave
the way to early word learning. The prolonged period of in-
fant dependency in humans combines with caregiving to
provide conditions for complex social learning.

Neonatal imitation is based on moving single effectors
and  thus  differs  from  goal-directed  imitation.  (Studdert-
Kennedy [2002] discusses data consistent with the view that
the infant at first imitates sounds by moving one articulator
and only later coordinates articulators.) Social reciprocity in
neonatal imitation (R3.1) may be a necessary precursor for
complex imitation, establishing that “I am like the other.”
Biological evolution may have selected for neonatal imita-
tion as a basis for complex imitation.

Yu & Ballard found that body cues signaling intention
can  aid  word  learning  in  adults,  suggesting  the  utility  of
such cues for children. Their computational model reliably
associates spoken words and their perceptually grounded
meanings. This model employs “small steps” which, they
suggest, would be accessible by a variety of social species,
and “yet they were only traversed by us.” However, they
seem accessible to parrots and bonobos as well as the 2-
year-old child – which is why I emphasize complex imita-
tion.

R3. Complementing complex imitation: Motivation

and theory of mind

Conversation, motivation, and theory of mind – and pros-
ody (R5.3) – must all be addressed in a satisfactory account
of the language-ready brain. This requires expanding MSH
rather than weakening it.

R3.1. Conversation
Kotchoubey emphasizes pragmatics, for example, what we
say  depends  on  the  mental  state  (R3.3)  of  our  “hearer.”
However, his claim that “We do not use language to trans-
mit  information,  but  to  persuade  and  motivate”  (R3.2)
seems  a  false  dichotomy.  “Look  at  this  beautiful  flower”
combines  information  – “This  flower  is  beautiful”  – and
persuasion – “Look at this flower.” Kotchoubey (personal
communication) stresses that his starting point is coopera-
tion between two or more humans, reinforcing the claims
of MSH for relating praxic and communicative actions.

Nagy suggests an innate basis for conversation that pre-
cedes its pragmatic function – newborn infants communi-
cate by using “imitation” right after birth (Nagy & Molnar
2004). She suggests that language develops from these early
intersubjective “conversations” (Trevarthen 2001). The cy-
cle of turn taking in “imitating” a small repertoire of “almost
innate” gestures is crucial in establishing the social pattern
of turn taking (R2.2). (Cf. “motherese”; R5.3.)

R3.2. Motivation
Prudkov downplays  complex  imitation,  arguing  that  the
complexity of languages builds on the ability of the human
brain to construct diverse goals. He suggests that animals
can form learned motivations only when basic drives are ac-

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

151

Response/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

tivated.  However,  animals  can  acquire  secondary  rein-
forcers, and so on. Chimpanzees have the ability to develop
non-innate subgoals (e.g., cracking nuts). The mirror sys-
tem  is  well  linked  to  the  motivational  system  in  the
macaque. The target article shows that the F5 mirror sys-
tem for grasping is best understood within the larger F5-
PF-STSa mirror system for manual and orofacial actions.
Rizzolatti et al. (2001) observe that STSa is also part of a cir-
cuit that includes the amygdala and the orbitofrontal cortex
and so may be involved in the elaboration of affective as-
pects  of  social  behavior.  Hence,  Prudkov’s  transition  to
“non-innate motivation” may be less proximate for the evo-
lution of the language-ready brain per se than complex im-
itation, which made possible the rapid acquisition of new
skills.

R3.3. Theory of mind
Fabrega stresses that successful pantomime presupposes
social cognition, awareness of self, and goal-setting  – re-
versing the view of those who attribute self-consciousness
to language (Macphail 2000). Fabrega (personal communi-
cation) also asks: “What are thoughts beyond internal use of
language”? Arbib (2001a) suggests that there are forms of
consciousness common to many mammals, but that mirror
system developments help explain why humans also have
forms of consciousness that build upon, rather than pre-
cede language. Development of increasing subtlety of lan-
guage can feed back into the nonlanguage system to refine
our perceptions and experience.

Fabrega says that I do not specify how much of the pro-
tosign/protospeech spiral is enough to support the cultural
evolution of language, and he asks whether “protoculture”
emerges as the expanding spiral gets underway. I suggest
that chimpanzees have protoculture (Whiten et al. 2001),
but that human culture is qualitatively different, and lan-
guage makes it so.

Williams sees the greatest evolutionary advantage con-
ferred  by  spoken  language  as  its  ability  to  communicate
mentalistic  concepts  (theory  of  mind,  ToM).  Williams
stresses selection pressure for social maneuvering where I
have  emphasized  physical  activities.  Surely  the  two  “do-
mains of discourse” complement each other. Williams notes
the possible role of the mirror neuron system in mentaliz-
ing (Gallese 2003; Meltzoff & Decety 2003). We need to in-
vestigate whether an account can be given of a shared evo-
lution of “mirror systems” suiting both ToM and complex
imitation. I hypothesize that the ancestral mirror system for
manual praxis was distinct from the putative mirror system
for facial expression of emotion. The former would support
pantomime and thence on to multimodal symbols; and then
the availability of symbols could enrich the latter to yield
rudiments of ToM.

Indurkhya sees the key to language evolution in an abil-
ity  to  see  and  feels  things  from  another  perspective  and
stresses the role of metaphor. Projection restructures the
target by creating a new ontology for it; generalization of
responsiveness of a mirror neuron may provide a novel on-
tology for objects and actions that can newly yield this ac-
tivity.  The  TA  shows  that  pantomime  must  be  supple-
mented by conventional gestures to yield protosign. Within
language  itself,  metaphor  broadens  our  language  by  ex-
tending (proto)words to new contexts. In some cases, con-
text is enough to recapture the shade of meaning. In oth-

152

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

ers, one must invent terms which can express shadings spe-
cific to the new domain.

Indurkhya suggests that the ability to project one’s self
into other animals or objects might mark a crucial transition
in hominid evolution. I think this notion is important. Much
work on empathy emphasizes the similarities between self
and  other  – but  one  must  be  able  to  maintain  different
models  of  other  agents,  adaptively  going  beyond  what  is
held in common to imagine essential differences.

Williams and Théoret & Fecteau see autism as pro-
viding a window on the role of the mirror system in ToM
and language. (Théoret & Fecteau add analysis of blind-
ness.) Deficits in autism are prominent in speech associated
with social communication, but praxic aspects of language
are fairly well preserved. Perhaps what is affected is not so
much language per se as the integration of this with affect
and  ToM.  Interestingly,  autistics  may  exhibit  stereotypic
mimicking (which monkeys do not have). Hence, it must be
reiterated that a fully functional human mirror system in-
hibits  mere  repetition  (echopraxia  and  echolalia)  and  in-
stead  relates  the  perception  of  perceived  actions  to  the
planning of an appropriate course of action.

R4. Lessons from modeling

R4.1. Biological neural networks
Horwitz,  Husain,  &  Guenther (Horwitz  et  al.)  note 
the importance of babbling in the development of spoken
and sign languages. The Infant Learning to Grasp Model
(ILGM; Oztop et al. 2004), mentioned briefly in the TA, is
a theory of how “manual babbling” leads to an effective set
of grasps. Arbib and Rizzolatti (1997) discussed the rele-
vance of inverse and forward models to MSH, building on
insights  of  Jordan  and  Rumelhart  (1992)  into  vocal  bab-
bling. Ito and Makino et al. also stressed the importance of
internal models; see Carr et al. (2003), Makino and Aihara
(2003), Miall (2003), Wolpert et al. (2003), and Ito (2005).
Because Piatelli-Palmarini & Bever note the problem of
determining  similarity  criteria  for  learning  models,  it  is
worth noting that the MNS and ILGM models have “in-
nate” hand-related biases which enable them to acquire a
range of grasps without having them built in. MNS input is
the hand state relating the hand to the goal affordance of
the object. ILGM acquires grasps whose visual manifesta-
tion MNS is to learn. ILGM has as its basis that the child
reaches for a salient object, executes the grasp reflex if pal-
mar contact is made, and builds a repertoire of grasps based
on those which prove to be stable – stability supplies the re-
inforcement signal.

Dominey models the transformation between semantic
structures and grammatical structures. He exploits the de-
velopmental analog of fractionation of holophrases to yield
“words”  which  fill  slots  thus  formed  in  the  holophrase.
Dominey et al. (2003) suggest that the resultant categorical
distinction between function and content elements evolved
first for sensory-motor function and then was exploited for
phrasal-conceptual function. Dominey sees his modeling as
consistent  with  Ullman’s  (2004)  declarative/procedural
model, in which the mental lexicon depends on temporal-
lobe substrates of declarative memory, while mental gram-
mar depends on a “procedural” network of frontal, basal-
ganglia,  parietal,  and  cerebellar  structures  supporting
learning and execution of motor and cognitive skills.

Response/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

Horwitz et al. model how learning an auditory target for
each native language sound may occur via a mirror neuron
system. Guenther (p.c.) notes that in this modeling, the per-
ceptual system organizes largely independently of the mo-
tor system, whereas motor development relies very heavily
on the auditory perceptual system.

Horwitz et al. emphasize the importance of combining
neural modeling with neurophysiological and brain imaging
data. Horwitz and Tagamets (2003) and Arbib et al. (1994)
developed techniques for using models of primate neuro-
physiological data to predict and analyze results of human
brain imaging. Arbib et al. (2000) analyze imitation of mo-
tor  skills,  relating  human  brain  imaging  to  data  on  the
macaque mirror system.

R4.2. Evolving artificial networks
We turn to using “simulated evolution” to obtain versions of
initially unstructured networks whose parameters fit them
to better perform or learn a class of actions. (Cangelosi &
Parisi [2002] and Briscoe [2002] include papers using arti-
ficial evolution to probe constraints on language, but almost
all the papers are far removed from neurobiology.)

Parisi, Borghi, Di Ferdinando & Tsiotas (Parisi et
al.) support MSH through computer simulations and be-
havioral experiments with humans which suggest that see-
ing objects or processing words referring to objects auto-
matically  activates  canonical  actions  that  we  perform  on
them. Parisi et al. (p.c.) point out that because actions are
the only inter-individually accessible aspect of behavior, in-
terpreting meanings in terms of actions might explain how
meanings can be shared.

Borenstein & Ruppin evolve networks in which evolu-
tion of imitation promotes emergence of neural mirroring.
However, primate data suggest that neural mirroring pre-
ceded imitation in human evolution. Borenstein (p.c.) re-
sponds that the key point is that in their system only the evo-
lution  of  imitation  was  solicited,  yet  a  mirror  system
emerged – suggesting that the link between imitation and
mirroring may be universal.

Pulvermüller opts for specifying the putative neural cir-
cuits of syntax and recursion first, and thinking about pos-
sible  evolution  later.  In  his  model  (Pulvermüller  2002),
words are represented by distributed cell assemblies whose
cortical  topographies  reflect  aspects  of  word  meaning;
these  assemblies  are  formed  by  correlation  learning  and
anatomical constraints. Syntactic rules emerge from the in-
terplay between sequence detectors and general principles
of neuronal dynamics. My concern is that this approach is
so focused on symbols that it is ill suited to grounding an
evolutionary approach to neurolinguistics.

Fagg  and  Arbib  (1992)  modeled  the  surprising  speed
with which monkeys could learn to associate a visual pat-
tern and a motor response. This led us to distinguish Stage
I from Stage II learning. Stage I may take months of shap-
ing for the monkey to learn a general task like “associate a
new visual pattern on this screen with the correct pull on
the lever in front of you and you will get a reward.” In Stage
II, the monkey knows the task, and then takes only seven or
so trials to stabilize the correct response to a novel visual
pattern (Mitz et al. 1991). My concern with models using
small  neural  networks  is  that  the  search  space  is  so  re-
stricted  that  Stage  I  is  no  longer  necessary.  As  one  ap-
proaches the more biological models of R4.1 one must con-

strain evolutionary models to provide insights that link to
the anatomy and neurophysiology of real brains. A key chal-
lenge for MSH-related modeling is to understand how to
“evolve” from a brain for which Stage I learning can never
yield  the  ability  to  learn  language,  to  a  human  brain  in
which perhaps 2.5 years of learning is required for Stage I
to make possible the “word explosion” which distinguishes
the human infant from the chimpanzee.

R5. The path to protospeech

Several  commentaries  concerned  H2:  protosign  provides
scaffolding  for  protospeech.  Those  who  take  a  “speech
only” approach ignore the fact that language is multimodal.
However, future work on MSH needs greater attention to
the auditory system.

R5.1. Co-speech gestures
McNeill, Bertenthal, Cole  &  Gallagher (McNeill  et
al.) show that speech and “gesticulations” form a single sys-
tem – a “gesticulation” (Kendon 1988) is a motion that em-
bodies  a  meaning  relatable  to  the  accompanying  speech.
About 90% of gesticulations synchronize with the speech
segments with which they are co-expressive. I disagree with
McNeill et al.’s claim that gesture and speech must convey
the  same  idea  unit.  Kita  and  Özyürek  (2003)  compared
speech-gesture coordination in Turkish, Japanese, and En-
glish descriptions of an animated cartoon. Gestures used to
express motion events were influenced by how features of
motion events were expressed in each language, but also by
spatial information that was never verbalized. However, the
key point is that gesticulation is truly part of language.

McNeill et al. reject the claim that language started as
a gesture language that was supplanted by speech and stress
the importance of a close coupling between manual and vo-
cal action. However, they suggest that my concept of an ex-
panding spiral of protosign and protospeech does not go far
enough. They advocate the evolution of a speech-gesture
system  in  which  speech  and  gesture  evolved  in  lockstep.
This criticism may be mistaken. Gesticulations are part of
language, not protolanguage. By contrast, protosign may in-
deed have had a pantomimic base, with protosign scaffold-
ing protospeech.

In any case, McNeill et al. establish that protolanguage
was multimodal and that gesture was not “turned off” in evo-
lution. Relating this to brain function, McNeill et al. offer
the telling example of a man who can control his limb move-
ments only through arduous visually guided attentional con-
trol, yet can still gesticulate while speaking even when he
cannot see his hands. Kemmerer describes a brain-damaged
subject, with intact semantic and grammatical knowledge of
motion  events,  whose  ability  to  retrieve  the  phonological
forms of concrete nouns, action verbs, and spatial preposi-
tions  was  severely  impaired  but  whose  ability  to  produce
gestures  with  language-typical  information  packaging  was
mostly preserved (Kemmerer et al., submitted).

Emmorey concedes that the existence of modern sign
languages might seem to support my hypothesis that there
was  an  early  stage  in  the  evolution  of  language  in  which
communication was predominantly gestural. However, she
rejects this view because “the only modern communities in
which a signed language is dominant have deaf members.”

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

153

Response/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

However, there are communities of hearing people using a
signed  language,  albeit  not  their  primary  one  (Kendon
1988).  Emmorey  suggests  that  sign  languages  can  tenta-
tively be traced back only 500 years, but such historical es-
timates are suspect. For example, http://www.ASLinfo.com/
trivia.cfm says that by a.d. 530 Benedictine monks had in-
vented signs to circumvent their vow of silence.

Emmorey asserts  that  “If  communicative  pantomime
and  protosign  preceded  protospeech,  it  is  not  clear  why
protosign simply did not evolve into sign language.” Mac-
Neilage & Davis suggest that I am “vulnerable” because I
posit an open pantomimic protosign stage, whereas Hock-
ett (1978) asserted that if manual communication had ever
achieved openness, we would never have abandoned it for
speech. However, I make no claim that protosign by itself
realized the full potential of this openness. Emmorey fur-
ther  asserts:  “A  gestural-origins  theory  must  explain  why
speech evolved at all, particularly when choking to death is
a potential by-product of speech evolution.” First, I do see
slight advantages for speech over sign (agreeing with Cor-
ballis 2002) or, rather, for the early combination of proto-
speech  with  protosign  over  protosign  alone,  though  this
judgment  is  subjective.  Second,  Clegg  and  Aiello  (2000)
show that the risk of choking is highly overstated: “Mortal-
ity  statistics  for  England  &  Wales . . .  [show]  that  overall
mortality from choking on food was very low averaging 0.6
per 100,000 head of population.” Third, just as it is a mat-
ter  of  historical  contingency  that  some  tribes  have  both
signed  and  spoken  languages,  it  may  well  be  that  some
tribes of early humans had languages dominated by speech
and others had protolanguages dominated by sign. At a time
of evolutionary bottleneck before humans left Africa 50,000
years ago, speech could have taken a dominant role. The
counter-question to Emmorey is then: “If speech has pri-
macy and sign is a modern innovation, how can one explain
the ubiquity of co-speech gestures?”

R5.2. Taking the auditory system seriously
Bosman, López  &  Aboitiz (Bosman  et  al.), Rausch-
ecker, and Horwitz et al. all make clear that future work
on MSH must pay more attention to data on the auditory
system than does the TA.

Bosman et al. (personal communication) argue that the
biological principles that supported the evolution of mirror
neurons  for  grasping  may  also  have  independently  sup-
ported the evolution of auditory mirror neurons, but they
agree  that  gesture  may  have  helped  establish  certain  se-
mantic aspects of protolanguage by the use of pantomime.
Their view is that protosign and protospeech coexisted and
coevolved, and each contributed to the development of the
other.

Bosman  et  al. discuss neurons in frontal areas of the
monkey that respond strongly to vocalizations and thereby
suggest that this domain may be the precursor of a vocal-
ization mirror system similar to the mirror system for grasp-
ing.  Rauschecker presents  further  relevant  material  on
the macaque auditory system (R7).

Horwitz et al. note that a human may recognize 105 au-
ditory objects, whereas the number of those that interest a
monkey seems small. Moreover, monkeys seem far better
in vision than audition in the use of long-term memory for
objects. They thus argue that biological evolution gave ho-
minids the ability to better discriminate and categorize au-

154

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

ditory objects, retain them in memory, and relate them to
articulatory gestures. I would agree, while noting that the
success of speech has been linked to the ability to form an
immense vocabulary from a small set of “phonemes” (the
Particulate Principle; Studdert-Kennedy 2002).

R5.3. Primate vocalization

The  issue  is  whether  primate  calls  evolved  directly  to
speech. Seyfarth argues that the parallels between primate
same-different judgments for calls and children’s percep-
tion of words cannot be ignored. However, such parallels
suggest properties of auditory discrimination necessary for
protospeech but do not help explain the crucial transition
to  production  of  an  open-ended  repertoire  of  symbols
linked to an open semantics. Seyfarth faults me for charac-
terizing primate vocalizations as “involuntary” signals but
Note 6 of the TA addresses this explicitly. Seyfarth shows
that I am wrong to deny that primate vocalizations are re-
lated to cortical regions, but his data primarily concern au-
dition. Bosman et al. suggest that in the monkey there is
overlap between area F5 and the cortical larynx represen-
tation,  but  Gilissen argues  that  monkey  calls  cannot  be
used as models for speech production because they are ge-
netically determined in their acoustic structure. A number
of brain structures crucial for the production of learned mo-
tor patterns such as speech production are dispensable for
the production of monkey calls (Jürgens 1998).

I have been unable to consult Cheney and Seyfarth’s (in
press) paper which apparently asserts that primate social
knowledge bears striking resemblances to the meanings we
express in language, which are built up by combining dis-
crete-valued entities in a structured, hierarchical, rule-gov-
erned,  and  open-ended  manner.  Though  uninformed,  I
speculate that Seyfarth may be misled by our human abil-
ity to offer a language-like description of the primates’ abil-
ities. This is not to deny that prelinguistic knowledge of so-
cial  relations  is  relevant  to  evolving  the  language-ready
brain (R3.3).

Provine discusses  contagious  yawning  and  laughing.
These seem analogous to the contagious alarm calls of non-
human primates. He observes that laughter is a ritualization
of the sound of labored breathing in rough-and-tumble play
– but,  presumably,  we  are  talking  of  biological  selection
rather than the free symbol creation to which ritualization
contributes at the phonological and morphosyntactic level
in language (Bybee 2001). Laughter punctuates the speech
stream, in contrast with the tight integration of gesticula-
tion and speech (McNeill et al.).

Kotchoubey and Fitch note that my emphasis on cogni-
tive-symbolic aspects of language ignores prosody. Kotchou-
bey  notes  that  prosody  subserves  both  affective  prosody
(emotional expression) and linguistic prosody (as in distin-
guishing between an assertion and a question) and that both
forms of prosodic information are processed mainly in the
right temporal lobe. In similar vein, Gilissen notes that hu-
man vocal behavior does resemble monkey calls in the emo-
tional intonations superimposed on the verbal component.
Kotchoubey (p.c.) observes that in many languages, intona-
tion is the only distinction between question and declara-
tion. He thus suggests that linguistic prosody is a part of the
right hemisphere so closely controlled by the left that they
cannot work without each other. This is reminiscent of the

Response/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

coupling of gesticulations to the syntax and semantics of a
specific language.

Gilissen cites Falk’s (2004a) evolutionary perspective on
the  hypothesis  that,  as  human  infants  develop,  a  special
form of infant-directed speech (motherese) provides a scaf-
fold  for  their  eventual  acquisition  of  language.  This  en-
riches our discussion of the role of the caregiver in neo-
natal “conversation” (R3.1). Gilissen says that the special
vocalizations of human motherese are in marked contrast to
the relatively silent mother/infant interactions that char-
acterize chimpanzees, yet suggests a possible link between
monkey calls and motherese. This apparent contradiction
suggests that the affective content of motherese (and proto-
language) builds upon the monkey vocalization system, but
the information content of motherese (and protolanguage)
has  a  complementary  evolutionary  history.  Kotchoubey
suggests  that  the  left-hemispheric  subsystem  develops 
as described by MSH to subserve the cognitive-symbolic
function, whereas the right-hemispheric subsystem is a di-
rect  successor  of  monkey  vocalization  mechanisms  and
gives language its intonational color. It is a long-standing
observation  (Hughlings  Jackson  1878–79)  that  impreca-
tions survive damage to the human brain that blocks nor-
mal  speech.  In  Arbib  (2002),  I  therefore  suggested  that 
the  language-ready  brain  integrates  action-oriented  and
affect-oriented systems in a pattern of cooperative compu-
tation.

Fitch adopts Darwin’s hypothesis that our prelinguistic
ancestors possessed an intermediate “protolanguage” that
was  musical  and  that  music  scaffolds  the  early  structural
and imitative aspects of language (prosody). He sees the se-
mantic stage as coming later. However, even if we accept
the importance of “musicality,” it does not follow that the
coevolution of vocal and manual gesture is tied more closely
to music than to pantomime and linguistic communication
– but it does encourage us to investigate how dance and
music might enrich MSH.

R5.4. Evolving a phonological system
MacNeilage & Davis argue that my view that pantomime
could be an open system disregards the view that for lan-
guage to become an open system it must have a combina-
torial phonology consisting of meaningless elements. How-
ever, I explicitly distinguish pantomime from protosign. But
I do say too little about getting from a pantomimic reper-
toire to a speech repertoire. The following, adapted from
Arbib (in press), may be helpful:

Signing exploits the signer’s rich praxic repertoire of arm
and  hand  movements,  and  builds  up  vocabulary  by  lan-
guage-sanctioned  variations  on  this  multi-dimensional
theme (move a hand shape along a trajectory to a particu-
lar position while making appropriate facial gestures). By
contrast, speech has no rich behavioral repertoire of non-
speech movements to build upon. Instead evolution took a
particulate path, so that the word is built (to a first approx-
imation) from a language-specific stock of phonemes (ac-
tions defined by the coordinated movement of several ar-
ticulators, but with only the goal of sounding right rather
than conveying meaning in themselves). On this analysis, a
basic reach and grasp corresponds to a single word in signed
language; whereas in speech, a basic reach and grasp is akin
to a phoneme, with a word being one level up the hierar-
chy. In either case, the brain must provide a computational

medium in which already available elements can be com-
posed to form new ones, irrespective of the level at which
these elements were themselves defined.

I  characterized  MacNeilage’s  frame/content  theory  as
being about the evolution of syllabification but offering no
clue as to what might have linked such a process to the ex-
pression of meaning. MacNeilage & Davis note that they
now address this criticism by arguing that the first words
may  have  been  kinship  terms  based  on  baby  talk  (Mac-
Neilage & Davis, in press b – I received the final version
only after the TA was “set in concrete”). I do not deny that
words  like  “mama”  and  “dada”  may  have  been  based  on
baby talk. But to suggest that this gives us insights into the
emergence of protolanguage seems to me to conflate phy-
logeny and ontogeny – the prototalk of adult hunter-gath-
erers is unlikely to have been much like baby talk.

For  Fabrega,  the  complexities  of  speech  production
seem in excess of what protosign/protospeech spiraling en-
tails. I disagree. Even a protovocabulary of a few hundred
protowords would already provide selective advantage for
changes in the vocal apparatus which “full” language could
exploit without further change. In any case, I insist that the
appropriate  framework  must  also  explain  co-speech  ges-
tures.

Kaplan & Iacoboni argue that mirror neurons in pre-
motor cortex that respond to the visual and auditory conse-
quences of actions allow for a modality-independent and
agent-independent coding of actions, which may have been
important for the emergence of language. Kaplan and Ia-
coboni (in preparation) found that when subjects simulta-
neously saw and heard an action, there was greater activity
in the premotor cortex compared with control conditions in
which they only saw or only heard the action. Rogalewski et
al.  report  the  use  of  trans-cranial  magnetic  stimulation
(TMS) to show that linguistic tasks, like speaking, covert
reading, and listening to speech, activate the hand motor
system bilaterally (Floel et al. 2003). Kaplan & Iacoboni ar-
gue that the role of audiovisual mirror neurons in the evo-
lution  of  language  deserves  more  attention.  I  agree,  but
suggest that the best framework for this is provided by the
expanding  spiral  hypothesis.  In  discussing  Kohler  et  al.
(2002) and Ferrari et al. (2003), the TA argued that these
data do not support the claim that protospeech mechanisms
could have evolved from F5 without the scaffolding pro-
vided by protosign. This matter is further debated by Fo-
gassi and Ferrari (in press), Arbib (2005), and MacNeilage
& Davis (in press b).

R6. From protolanguage to language

R6.1. For and against holophrasis
The  hypothesis  that  protolanguage  was  based  on  holo-
phrases was offered as an alternative to the view of proto-
language utterances as strings of “words as we know them.”
Fitch supports the holophrase theory of language origin
but suggests that Baldwinian exaptations may underlie the
first behavioral stages in the transition from holistic com-
munication toward modern language. I accept that the de-
velopment  of  an  articulatory  system  adequate  to  the  de-
mands of (proto)language phonology may have involved a
Baldwinian effect but doubt Fitch’s claim that the transition
to  language  must  have  been  “strongly  and  consistently
shaped  by  selection  [. . .],  given  the  communicative  and

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

155

Response/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

conceptual advantages that a compositional, lexicalized lan-
guage offers.” Agriculture, writing, and living in cities pro-
vide evidence that being advantageous does not imply a ge-
netic change. Because of this I took pains to make clear that
one’s account of the evolution of the human brain might be
seen  as  having  two  very  different  results:  “the  language-
ready brain” versus “the brain that ‘has’ language.”

Bridgeman argues against holophrasis. He asserts that
monkey calls can be paraphrased in one or two words, such
as “leopard.” However, the leopard call’s meaning can be
better approximated in English by the sentence: “There is a
leopard nearby. Danger! Danger! Run up a tree to escape.”
To this he might respond, “It’s only one word, because ‘leop-
ard’ is enough to activate the whole thing.” But once one
moves to protolanguage, one may want to convey meanings
like “There is a dead leopard. Let’s feast upon it,” and we
clearly cannot use the alarm call as the word for leopard in
this  utterance.  Bridgeman  asserts  that  the  generality  of
words is about the same in all languages and therefore con-
stitutes a possibly biological “universal” of language. How-
ever, it is well known that a word in one language may re-
quire a phrase or more to translate into another language. I
therefore maintain that the size of words is a result of a long
history of building increasingly flexible languages.

Bickerton is so “language-centered” that he gives us lit-
tle help in imaginatively recreating possible scenarios for a
time when hominid protolanguage was at an early stage of
development. He asserts that it is “questionable whether
any species could isolate ‘a situation’ from the unbroken,
ongoing stream of experience unless it already had a lan-
guage with which to do so.” But we know that biological
evolution yielded a repertoire of primate calls each of which
is akin to (but very different from) a “protoword” describ-
ing a “situation” in my sense, and I have tried to imagine
how the brain could have so evolved that such protowords
could be “invented” and disseminated in hominid commu-
nities. I suggest that early hominids very rarely created pro-
towords for new situations. I require only a slow accretion
of such nameable situations in each generation to build to-
wards  the  critical  mass  that  constituted  protolanguage.
Bickerton notes that those who play charades use “a large
set of ‘disambiguating signs’ – stereotypic gestures for ‘film
title,’ ‘book title,’ and so on.” I concede that early hominids
had no signs for these! But the crucial point is this: When I
posit  that  there  is  a  protoword  for  “The  alpha  male  has
killed a meat animal and now the tribe has a chance to feast
together. Yum, yum!”, I do not claim that (at first) there
were protowords for all the variations, such as “The alpha
male has killed a meat animal but it’s too scrawny to eat.
Woe  is  we.”  I  think  this  point  also  addresses  one  half  of
MacNeilage  &  Davis’s  dismissal  of  my  supposed  claim
that hominids in the protospeech stage could have “dashed
off complex semantic concepts with holistic phonetic utter-
ances”  (those  are  their  words  not  mine).  Bickerton  cites
Tallerman (2004), who argues that holophrasis was incom-
patible with contrastive phonology, but (as argued above) as
the  protovocabulary  increased,  the  different  protowords
(whether signed, spoken, or both) would need to be read-
ily generated and comprehended, and this could provide as
much pressure for the particulate principle as does the anti-
holophrase position.

Bickerton (p.c.) makes the telling point that I have of-
fered no example of a hypothetical conversation consisting
of  representations  of  frequently  occurring  situations  and

156

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

that any model that will not do conversation (R3.1) is “worse
than dubious.” I have given too little thought to this, but
suggest that protoconversations may have been like the in-
teractions that we see in nonhuman primates, with a few
protowords interspersed among actions, rather than taking
– from the start – the form of a steady interchange of proto-
words.

I accept Bickerton’s argument that it is implausible that
all  “real  words”  are  foreshadowed  by  widely  distributed
fragments  of  protowords.  However,  Kirby’s  (2000)  com-
puter  simulation  shows  that  statistical  extraction  of  sub-
strings whose meanings stabilize can yield surprisingly pow-
erful  results  across  many  generations.  I  thus  see  the
“Wray-Kirby mechanism” as part of the story of the pro-
tolanguage-language transition, but not the whole one. My
sour fruit story, plus aspects of ritualization, provides other
mechanisms whereby the virtues of a synthetic description
might emerge – with the consequent demand for a proto-
syntax  to  disambiguate  combinations  once  the  combina-
torics began to explode.

Wray notes  that  neurolinguistic  and  clinical  evidence
suggests  that  linguistic  representation  in  the  brain  is
mapped  on  the  principle  of  functional  motivation  (Wray
2002a, Ch. 14). Wray (p.c.) expands on this as follows: When
people lose language skills after a stroke, it is common for
them to retain formulaic expressions such as “good morn-
ing” while they are unable to compose novel messages (cf.
R5.3). She focuses on the functions of the material, and pro-
poses that the functional locus supporting a class of lexical
material  – for example, names for people whose faces we
recognize might be activated via the mechanisms that pro-
cess visual face recognition, whereas expressions used for
context-determined  phatic  interaction  would  be  activated
via,  say,  the  right-hemisphere  areas  that  handle  context
pragmatics – would be linked to the “language” areas of the
left hemisphere. Damage to left-hemisphere language areas
could block the ability to generate names and expressions on
request, but spare the ability to use the words and expres-
sions themselves, if activated as functional wholes.

Wray supports the holophrasis theory by focusing on the
linguistic phenomenon of irregularity. She presents a num-
ber  of  “oddities”  about  language  use  that  are  readily  ex-
plained if humans are predisposed to treat input and out-
put holistically where they can, and to engage in linguistic
analysis only to the extent demanded by expressive need.
Her formulation bridges between “true wholes” (protolan-
guage  holophrasis)  and  “apparent  compounds”  (formulas
within a modern language) – supporting our view that the
“protolexicon” had many such wholes, rather than combin-
ing  “words  as  we  know  them.”  Wray  shows  that  the
“holophrastic  impulse”  remains  part  of  modern  language
use, even though languages have long supplanted protolan-
guages in human society.

Bridgeman denies  holophrasis,  but  then  asks  “How
could the sorts of words that cannot be used alone get in-
vented?” and looks for evidence to the development of lan-
guage in children. He concedes that a child’s first utterances
are holophrases but “next comes a two-word slot grammar.”
But  ontogeny  does  not  equal  phylogeny.  The  child  “ex-
tracting statistics” from the adult word stream is a far cry
from early hominids, for whom very few (proto)words al-
ready existed. In modeling the 2-year-old, Hill (1983; Arbib
et al. 1987; cf. Peters 1983 for data) sees the child as ex-
tracting fragments of the adult’s speech stream to provide a

Response/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

set of templates that describe situations. At first, “want milk”
or  “love  Teddy”  are  unanalyzed  wholes,  but  then  words
common to many templates crystallize out, and word cate-
gories follow as it is recognized that certain words can fill
similar slots (recall Dominey’s modeling, R4.1). This sup-
ports the claim that “holophrasis” is prototypical but that
modern communities provide a setting in which the “Wray-
Kirby mechanism” can extract existing words in a few years
rather than extending the protovocabulary over the course
of many generations.

Piattelli-Palmarini & Bever note that although idioms like
“he kicked the bucket” may be semantically non-composi-
tional, they do obey strict syntactic constraints. However, it
is a mistake to confuse Wray’s observation of the role of for-
mulas in modern language use with the idea that protowords
were  themselves  formulas.  We  are  trying  to  imagine  ho-
minids without syntax and understand how they did get syn-
tax. Hurford asserts that a synthetic evolutionary route to
compositional syntax is “simpler” than the analytic (Wray-
Arbib) account. But by what measure? Once you have dis-
covered the combinatorial power of using syntax to combine
words, then words are simpler. But if you have not done so,
then labeling significant events or constructs seems the sim-
pler strategy – which is why I still support the holophrasis
theory as a viable alternative to the synthetic account.

R6.2. Bringing in semantics
The  issue  of  semantics  was  emphasized  not  only  by  In-
durkhya (see  sect.  R3.1)  but  also  by  Choe,  Dessalles  &
Ghadakpour, Hurford, Pulvermüller, and Werning (supple-
mental commentaries). Hurford caught me in an embar-
rassing lapse. When I disagreed with “Hurford’s suggestion
that there is a mirror system for all concepts,” it turns out
that I was disagreeing not with the ideas published in Hur-
ford  (2004)  but  with  Hurford’s  preliminary  ideas  as  ex-
pressed in early discussions before the paper was written. I
am happy to report that we are now in essential agreement
about the diversity of perceptual and motor schemas.

Choe cites a thought experiment of Choe and Bhamidi-
pati (2004) to assert that voluntary action can provide mean-
ing to one’s internal perceptual state, and that maintained in-
variance  in  the  internal  perceptual  state  can  serve  as  a
criterion  for  learning  the  appropriate  action  sequence.
Parisi et al. assert “If we interpret not only signs but also
their meaning in terms of motor actions, we can understand
how meanings can be shared between speakers and hearers.
Motor actions are the only aspect of behavior which is inter-
individually accessible.” However, there is no “reddish ac-
tion” as such. And we must be careful about jumping to the
idea that every gesture mimics a direct action. Nonetheless,
I welcome the discussion by Parisi et al. of evidence that lan-
guage is grounded in action. Studies on the neural basis of
cognition suggest that different areas are activated for ma-
nipulable  and  non-manipulable  objects  (Chao  &Martin
2000); manual gestures may be automatically activated not
only by visual stimuli but by words, too (Gentilucci 2003a;
2003b); and Borghi et al. (2004) found in a part verification
task that responding by moving the arm in a direction in-
compatible with the part location was slow relative to re-
sponding in a direction compatible with the part location.

This could explain why Ruchsow argued that MSH is in
good agreement with an externalistic account of semantics.
The externalist denies that there is any fact about my men-

tal or neural states that constitutes the meaning of my words
(Kripke  1982;  Wittgenstein  1958).  For  internalists,  con-
versely, cognition is computation over (symbolic) represen-
tations  (Kurthen  1992).  Ruchsow  rejects  internalism  be-
cause it lets us “throw the world away,” allowing reason and
thought to be focused on the inner model instead (Clark
1999). Ruchsow finds that many passages in the TA can be
read in favor of externalism but sees “some sympathy for in-
ternalism” in references to fMRI and PET studies. Actually,
I  regard  both  externalism  and  internalism  as  incomplete
and have sought a framework in which the partial truths of
each can be integrated. Arbib and Hesse (1986) expanded
my “internal” schema theory of “schemas in the head” to
provide  a  complementary  account  of  “external”  schemas
that reside in the statistics of social interaction and are thus
the expression of socially shared (externalist) knowledge.

Werning confronts  the  “complex  first”  paradox:  sub-
stance concepts are more frequently lexicalized across lan-
guages than attribute concepts, and their lexical expressions
are ontogenetically acquired earlier. This is hard to recon-
cile with the view that prototypical substance concepts are
semantically complex so that, for example, the substance
concept [mango] is made up of the vector of attribute con-
cepts ⬍orange, oval, big, soft, sweet, edible, . . .⬎. My so-
lution is to distinguish the distributed code for “orange” as
a feature implicit in early visual processing from the neural
representation of “orange” as a concept that can be put into
words. Werning cites Fodor’s (1995) view of mental repre-
sentations to argue that it would be logically impossible to
have two representations with the same content in one and
the same brain. However, data reviewed in section 3.1 of
the TA show that the size of an object may have different
representations for grasping (dorsal) and “declaring” (ven-
tral). Similarly, the color of an object may be salient in seg-
menting it from the background or distinguishing it from
other objects, yet not enter consciousness. For the child,
the redness of his truck is as indissoluble from the truck’s
identity as the fact that it has wheels – so the word “truck”
may imply “redness” and “wheels” when the child does not
have words or well-formed concepts for either.

Dessalles  &  Ghadakpour stress  that  an  account  of  the
evolutionary emergence of language should “explain why
and how our ancestors got minds able to form predicative
structures, and to express them through compositional lan-
guages.” (See Hurford [2003] for a different approach to
this problem.) They point to a crucial distinction between
gaining the use of predicative structures to communicate
some aspects of a situation and using predicates to “think
new thoughts”: “We can systematically express the negative
version of a predicative structure, for example, ‘Leo doesn’t
grasp the raisin,’ whereas there is no perceptive meaning
corresponding to the negation of a visual scene.” I would
agree, yet would suggest that one can imagine a series of
“inventions”  that  would  build  more  and  more  general
power into such a capability. At first, the effort to apply cer-
tain recognition criteria failing to meet the threshold is what
justifies the negation. This requires that context demands
that only some tests, of all possible perceptual tests, be ap-
plied (cf. presuppositions). I would probably not say to you
“There are no onions in my office” unless, for example, you
knew I was in my office and had expressed your need of
onions. Section 7 of the TA talks of language capabilities be-
ing extended by bricolage over a long period of time, and
argues  that  “the  language-ready  brain”  provided  by  the

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

157

Response/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

genome  lacks  much  of  what  we  now  take  for  granted  as
parts of language. I view and, not, and every as human in-
ventions augmenting language and thus reshaping thought.

R6.3. Concerning innate universal grammar
Kotchoubey questions my view that the development of
language from protolanguage was social by noting that dis-
semination of “inventions” currently exploits such institu-
tions as writing, hierarchical social organization, and mass
media. I respond that it was because early humans did not
have such institutions that their inventions would diffuse
more slowly by protoword of mouth – and hand. That is why
I think that the “cumulative bricolage” that led to the earli-
est “full” languages may have taken 100,000 years. Kotchou-
bey  (p.c.)  responds  that  the  social  mechanisms  present
from the very beginning, for example, socialization in tribes
and education in families, are known to be very conserva-
tive and to brake progress rather to promote it. He thus ar-
gues that development of the first language rested on bio-
logical natural selection.

Kotchoubey notes that degrees of linguistic and genetic
similarity between populations correlate, and that the tran-
sition from protolanguage to language may have covered
1,500 to 2,000 generations, and so he cannot understand
why  biological  mechanisms  should  be  denied  during  the
evolution of the very first language. Yes, Cavalli-Sforza et al.
(1996) attest that the length of isolation of a group yields cor-
related amounts of drift in both genetic structure and lan-
guage structure, but there is no suggestion that the genetic
changes are linked to the language changes. The counter to
my hypothesis, then, would be to offer concrete proposals
on how to shift the boundary from my set of criteria for pro-
tolanguage further into the language domain of syntax and
compositional semantics. But how far? My firm conviction
is that the genome does not specify a principles-and-param-
eters universal grammar, but I could accept that phonologi-
cal expression of hierarchical structure might require a bio-
logical change not within my current criteria for language
readiness. (Recall Fitch on Baldwinian exaptation, R6.1.)

Kemmerer supports the view that grammatical categories
gradually emerged over hundreds of generations of histori-
cal  language  transmission  and  change.  Linguists  identify
grammatical categories primarily by formal criteria, but the
criteria used in some languages are either completely absent
in others or are employed in ways that seem bizarre com-
pared to English. For example, verbs are often marked for
tense, aspect, mood, and transitivity, but some languages,
such as Vietnamese, lack all such inflection; Makah, on the
other hand, applies aspect and mood markers not only to
words that are translated into English as verbs, but also to
words that are translated into English as nouns or adjectives.
Croft (e.g., 2001) addresses such quandaries by “construc-
tion  grammar,”  seeking  to  identify  the  grammatical  cate-
gories of individual languages according to the constructions
unique to those languages. Of course, one may relate these
to semantic and pragmatic prototypes: prototypical nouns
specify objects and have referential functions, prototypical
verbs specify actions and have predicative functions, and so
on. Such considerations are very much consistent with the
notion  that  languages  (not  Language-with-a-capital-L)
evolved culturally through bricolage within many commu-
nities  and  diffusion  across  communities  (Aikhenvald  &
Dixon 2002; Dixon 1997; Lass 1997; Ritt 2004).

158

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

R7. Towards a mirror-system based

neurolinguistic model

Only one commentary touched on Figure 6 of the TA, but
I gather here a number of comments relevant to the pro-
gram it exemplified.

R7.1. Anatomically distinct regions may share an

evolutionary history

Figure 6 of the TA offered a highly conceptual extension of
the FARS model to include the mirror system for grasping
and the language system evolved “atop” this. I see the var-
ious circuits as evolutionary cousins but do not require that
the same circuitry subserves them. Given this, I am grate-
ful for the review by Barrett, Foundas & Heilman (Bar-
rett et al.) of functional and structural evidence support-
ing  differential  localization  of  the  neuronal  modules
controlling  limb  praxis,  speech  and  language,  and  emo-
tional communication, but I am puzzled as to why they view
these  data  as  justifying  rejection  of  an  evolutionary  rela-
tionship between the underlying mechanisms. Barrett et al.
assert that the TA treats different forelimb gesture classes
interchangeably,  whereas,  for  example,  it  cites  data  from
Corina et al. (1992a) which separate pantomime from sign-
ing.

There is no space here for a disquisition on mammalian
brain evolution. Let me simply refer to Kaas (1993), Butler
and Hodos (1996), Krubitzer (1998), and Striedter (2004)
for support of the conclusion that increasing complexity of
behavior is paralleled by increases in the overall size and
number  of  functional  subdivisions  of  neocortex  and  the
complexity of internal organization of the subdivisions, and
that reduplication of circuitry may form the basis for differ-
ential evolution of copies of a given system, with differing
connectivities, and so on, to serve a variety of functions.

Barrett et al. usefully summarize data showing that in
most humans, the left hemisphere may be dominant in the
control of vocalization associated with propositional speech,
but the right hemisphere often controls vocalization associ-
ated with emotional prosody, automatic speech, and sing-
ing. Moreover, Kotchoubey notes that although the right
temporal lobe is critical for recognition of prosody (R5.3),
prosodic aspects of language are also severely impaired in
patients with lesions to orbitofrontal cortex (which has links
to the mirror system, R3.2) and the corpus callosum. The
latter, presumably, is related to integration between the two
hemispheres.

Such data must be taken into account in building upon
Figure 6 of the TA but do not contradict MSH at its current
level of detail.

R7.2. Action planning complements mirror systems
I have already (in R2.1) applauded Bridgeman’s insistence
that mirror systems must be supplemented by a planning
capability to allow language to evolve. Interestingly, the de-
sign of Figure 6 of the TA was motivated in part by the work
of Bridgeman. Recall the crucial role of inferotemporal cor-
tex (IT) and prefrontal cortex (PFC) in modulating affor-
dance selection in the FARS model. In the psychophysical
experiments of Bridgeman et al. (1997; Bridgeman 1999),
an observer sees a target in one of several possible positions,
and a frame either centered before the observer or deviated

Response/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

left or right. Verbal judgments of the target position are al-
tered by the background frame’s position, but “jabbing” at
the target never misses, regardless of the frame’s position.
The data demonstrate independent representations of vi-
sual space in the two systems, with the observer aware only
of the spatial values in the cognitive (inferotemporal) sys-
tem. The crucial point here is that communication must be
based on the size estimate generated by IT, not that gener-
ated by posterior parietal cortex (PP). Thus, all three paths
of Figure 6 of the TA are enriched by the prefrontal system,
which combines current IT input with memory structures
combining objects, actions, and relationships. (The figure
just shows the path IT r DPLF as it may affect Wernicke’s
area.)

Bosman et al. disagree with the contrast (Arbib & Bota
2003) between the MSH theory presented in the TA as be-
ing “prospective” and the Aboitiz and García (1997) theory
as  being  “retrospective.”  Our  point  was  that  Aboitiz  and
García focused on lexicon and syntax and looked at what
might support them, without suggesting the intermediate
stages that might have emerged through evolutionary pres-
sures  before  language  itself  “appeared  on  the  scene.”  As
noted  in  the  TA,  these  researchers  emphasize  working
memory,  whereas  earlier  work  on  MSH  failed  to  do  so.
Hence the inclusion of working memories in Figure 6 of the
TA. Further modeling must also take into account issues
discussed in R4.1.

Figure 6 of the TA has auditory input only to area Tpt,
whereas Rauschecker notes that auditory objects, includ-
ing speech sounds, are identified in anterior superior tem-
poral cortex (aST), which projects directly to inferior frontal
regions and not along a posterior pathway, as classically as-
sumed. He suggests that aST supports both the decoding of
vocalizations in nonhuman primates and the decoding of
human speech: “the conclusion is hard to escape that . . .
nonhuman primate vocalizations are an evolutionary pre-
cursor  to  human  speech  sounds”  (cf.  discussion  of  Sey-
farth, R5.3). However, brain imaging of users of sign lan-
guage  (Emmorey  2002)  suggests  that  the  brain  regions
constituting the perceptual and motor periphery differ be-
tween sign (parietal lobe in, manual-facial out) and speech
(temporal lobe in; vocal-articulatory out), but that there are
large overlap regions assumed to be responsible for syntac-
tic and semantic processing at a level abstracted from the
peripheral codes. This is the set of “new” regions which my
theory  begins  to  explain.  Given  this,  I  would  not  expect
“protospeech” as it “spirally evolves” with “protosign” to in-
vent a whole new periphery, but rather, to co-opt available
resources. My impression would be that the auditory sys-
tem of nonhuman primates is (almost) adequate for speech
perception (note the restrictions reviewed by Horwitz et
al., R5.2) whereas (R5.4) the motor side needed immense
changes  to  get  separable  control  of  vocal  articulators  to
make the sounds of speech (as distinct from primate calls).

R8. Envoi

By way of conclusion, I simply invite the reader to return to
section R1.1 of this response and assess my claim that, over-
all, the extended mirror system hypothesis is alive and well.
I believe it has survived most of the criticism that would de-
stroy  its  key  claims,  but  that  the  commentaries  provide
many challenges for linking the evolving mirror system to

other systems and for filling in many details that remain too
sketchy or have not yet received due attention.

References

Letters “a” and “r” appearing before authors’ initials refer to target article
and response, respectively.

Aboitiz, F. & García V. R. (1997) The evolutionary origin of the language areas in

the human brain. A neuroanatomical perspective. Brain Research Reviews
25:381–96.

[arMAA, CB]

Aboitiz, F., García, R., Brunetti, E. & Bosman, C. (in press) The origin of Broca’s

area and its connections from an ancestral working memory network. In:
Broca’s area, ed. K. Amunts & Y. Grodzinsky. Oxford University Press.

[CB]

Acardi, A. C. (2003) Is gestural communication more sophisticated than vocal

communication in wild chimpanzees? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 26:210–
11.

[CB]

Adolphs, R., Damasio, H. & Tranel, D. (2002) Neural systems for recognition of

emotional prosody: A 3-D lesion study. Emotion 2:23–51.

[BK]
Aikhenvald, A. Y. & Dixon, R. M. W. (2002) Areal diffusion and genetic

inheritance. Oxford University Press.

[rMAA]

Albert, M. L., Goodglass, H., Helm, N. A., Rubens, A. B. & Alexander, M. P.

(1981) Clinical aspects of dysphagia. Springer-Verlag.

[AMB]

Alissandrakis, A., Nehaniv, C. L. & Dautenhahn, K. (2002) Imitation with ALICE:

Learning to imitate corresponding actions across dissimilar embodiments.
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part A 32(4):482–96.
[BI]

American Psychiatric Association (1994) Diagnostic and statistical manual of
[HT]
Arbib, M. A. (1981) Perceptual structures and distributed motor control. In:

mental disorders, 4th edition. American Psychiatric Association.

Handbook of physiology, section 2: The nervous system, vol. II: Motor control,
part 1, ed. V. B. Brooks, pp. 1449–80. American Physiological Society.
[aMAA]

(2001a) Co-evolution of human consciousness and language. In: Cajal and
consciousness: Scientific approaches to consciousness on the centennial of
Ramón y Cajal’s textura, ed. Pedro C. Marijuan. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 929:195–220.

[arMAA]

(2001b) Computational models of monkey mechanisms for the control of

grasping: Grounding the mirror system hypothesis for the evolution of the
language-ready brain. In: Simulating the evolution of language, ed. A.
Cangelosi & D. Parisi. Springer-Verlag.

[aMAA]

(2002) The mirror system, imitation, and the evolution of language. In: Imitation
in animals and artifacts, ed. C. Nehaniv & K. Dautenhahn, pp. 229–80. MIT
Press.

[aMAA]

(2003) Schema theory. In: The handbook of brain theory and neural networks,

2nd edition, ed. M. A. Arbib, pp. 993–98. A Bradford Book/MIT Press.
[aMAA]

(2004) How far is language beyond our grasp? A response to Hurford. In:

Evolution of communication systems: A comparative approach, ed. D. K.
Oller & U. Griebel, pp. 315–21, MIT Press.

[aMAA]

(2005) Interweaving protosign and protospeech: Further developments beyond

the mirror. Interaction Studies: Social Behaviour and Communication in
Biological and Artificial Systems 6:145–71.

[arMAA, PFM]

(in press) A sentence is to speech as what is to action? [A Contribution to the

Special Issue on Integrative Models of Brocas Area and the Ventral Premotor
Cortex]. Cortex: A Journal Devoted to the Study of the Nervous System and
Behavior.

[rMAA]

Arbib, M. A. & Bota, M. (2003) Language evolution: Neural homologies and

neuroinformatics. Neural Networks 16:1237–60.

[arMAA, CB]

Arbib, M. A. & Hesse, M. B. (1986) The construction of reality. Cambridge

University Press.

[rMAA]

Arbib, M. A. & Rizzolatti, G. (1997) Neural expectations: A possible evolutionary
path from manual skills to language. Communication and Cognition 29:393–
423.

[arMAA, PFM]

Arbib, M. A., Billard, A., Iacoboni, M. & Oztop, E. (2000) Synthetic brain imaging:

Grasping, mirror neurons and imitation. Neural Networks 13:975–97.

[rMAA]

Arbib, M. A., Bischoff, A., Fagg, A. H. & Grafton, S. T. (1994) Synthetic PET:

Analyzing large-scale properties of neural networks. Human Brain Mapping
2:225–33.

[rMAA]

Arbib, M. A., Caplan, D. & Marshall, J. C., eds. (1982) Neural models of language

processes. Academic Press.

[rMAA]

Arbib, M. A., Conklin, E. J. & Hill, J. C. (1987) From schema theory to language.

Oxford University Press.

[rMAA]

Arbib, M. A., Érdi, P. & Szentágothai, J. (1998) Neural organization: Structure,

function, and dynamics. MIT Press.

[rMAA]

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

159

References/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

Arbib, M. A., Fagg, A. H. & Grafton, S. T. (2003) Synthetic PET imaging for

grasping: From primate neurophysiology to human behavior. In: Exploratory
analysis and data modeling in functional neuroimaging, ed. F. T. Sommer &
A. Wichert, pp. 232–50. MIT Press.

[rMAA]

Arbib, M. A., Oztop, E. & Zukow-Goldring, P. (in press) Language and the mirrow
system: A perception/action based approach to communicative development.
Cognitie Creier Comportament/Cognitive Brain Behavior

[aMAA] 

Armstrong, D. F., Stokoe, W. C. & Wilcox, S. E. (1995) Gesture and the nature of

language. Cambridge University Press.

[aMAA, DM]

Atran, S. & Norenzayan, A. (2004) Religion’s evolutionary landscape:

Counterintuition, commitment, compassion, and communion. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences 27(6):713–30.

[HF]

Avikainen, S., Wohlschläger, A., Liuhanen, S., Hanninen R. & Hari, R. (2003)

Impaired mirror-image imitation in Asperger and high-functioning autistic
subjects. Current Biology 13:339–41.

[HT]

understanding the cortical organization of semantic processing. Annual
Review of Neuroscience 25:151–88.

[JPR]

Borenstein, E. & Ruppin, E. (2004) Evolving imitating agents and the emergence

of a neural mirror system. In: Artificial Life IX: Proceedings of the Ninth
International Conference on the Simulation and Synthesis of Living Systems,
ed. J. Pollack, M. Bedau, P. Husbands, T. Ikegami & R. A. Watson. MIT Press.
[EB]

(2005) The evolution of imitation and mirror neurons in adaptive agents.

Cognitive Systems Research (Special issue on Epigenetic Robotics) 6(3):229–
42.

[EB]

Borghi, A. M., Di Ferdinando, A. & Parisi, D. (2002) The role of perception and

action in object categorization. In: Connectionist models of cognition and
perception, ed. J. A. Bullinaria & W. Lowe, pp. 40–50. World Scientific.
(submitted) Objects, spatial compatibility and affordances: A connectionist

[DP]

study.

[DP]

Aziz-Zadeh, L., Iacoboni, M., Zaidel, E., Wilson, S. & Mazziotta, J. (2004) Left

Borghi, A. M., Glenberg, A. M. & Kaschak, M. P. (2004) Putting words in

hemisphere motor facilitation in response to manual action sounds. European
Journal of Neuroscience 19(9):2609–12.

[JTK]

Aziz-Zadeh, L., Maeda, F., Zaidel, E., Mazziotta, J. & Iacoboni, M. (2002)

Lateralization in motor facilitation during action observation: A TMS study.
Experimental Brain Research 144(1):127–31.

[JTK]
Baddeley, A. D. (1986) Working memory. Clarendon Press.
Ballard, D. H., Hayhoe, M. M., Pook, P. K. & Rao, R. P. N. (1997) Deictic codes

[HF]

perspective. Memory and Cognition 32:863–73.

[rMAA, DP]

Borghi, A. M., Parisi, D. & Di Ferdinando, A. (2005) Action and hierarchical level
of categories: A connectionist perspective. Cognitive Systems Research 6:99–
110.

[DP]

Bosman, C., García, R. & Aboitiz, F. (2004) FOXP2 and the language working

memory system. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 8:251–52.

[CB]

Bostanov, V. & Kotchoubey, B. (2004) Recognition of affective prosody:

for the embodiment of cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 20:1311–28.
[CY]

Continuous wavelet measures of event-related brain potentials to emotional
exclamations. Psychophysiology 41:259–68.

[BK]

Barkow, J. H. (1989) Darwin, sex and status: Biological approaches to mind and

Boyer, P. (1994) The naturalness of religious ideas: A cognitive theory of religion.

culture. University of Toronto Press.

[HF]

Baron-Cohen, S. (2002) I am loved, therefore I think. Book review of The cradle of

thought by R. P. Hobson. Nature 416:791–92.

[HT]

Barrett, A. M., Crucian, G. P., Raymer, A. M. & Heilman, K. M. (1999) Spared

comprehension of emotional prosody in a patient with global aphasia.
Neuropsychiatry, Neuropsychology, and Behavioral Neurology 12:117–20.
[AMB]

Barrett, A. M., Dore, L. S., Hansell, K. A. & Heilman, K. M. (2002) Speaking
while gesturing: The relationship between spontaneous speech and limb
praxis. Neurology 58:499–500.

[AMB]

Barrett, A. M., Schwartz, R. L., Raymer, A. L., Crucian, G. P., Rothi, L. J. G. &

Heilman, K. M. (1998) Dyssynchronous apraxia: Failure to combine
simultaneous preprogrammed movements. Cognitive Neuropsychology
15:685–703.

[AMB]

University of California Press.

[HF]

Brauth, S. E., Liang, W. & Roberts, T. F. (2001) Projections of the oval nucleus of
the hyperstriatum ventrale in the budgerigar: Relationships with the auditory
system. Journal of Comparative Neurology 432:481–511.

[IMP]

Breazeal, C., Buchsbaum, D., Gray, J., Gatenby, D. & Blumberg, B. (2005)

Learning from and about others: Towards using imitation to bootstrap the
social understanding of others by robots. Artificial life 11(1–2):31–62.

[BI]
Bridgeman, B. (1992) On the evolution of consciousness and language. Psycoloquy

3(15) Consciousness (1). Refereed electronic journal, available at:
http://www.cogsci.ecs.soton.ac.uk/cgi/psyc/newpsy?3.15.
[BB]

(1999) Separate representations of visual space for perception and visually

guided behavior. In: Cognitive contributions to the perception of spatial and
temporal events, ed. G. Aschersleben, T. Bachmann & J. Müsseler, pp. 3–13.
Elsevier Science.

[rMAA]

Bass, A. H. & Baker, R. (1997) Phenotypic specification of hindbrain rhombomeres

(2003) Psychology and evolution: The origins of mind. Sage.

[BB]

and the origins of rhythmic circuits in vertebrates. Brain Behavior and
Evolution 50(Suppl.1):3–16.

[EG]

Bass, A. H. & McKibben, J. R. (2003) Neural mechanisms and behaviors for

acoustic communication in teleost fish. Progress in Neurobiology 69:1–26.
[EG]

Bridgeman, B., Peery, S. & Anand, S. (1997) Interaction of cognitive and

sensorimotor maps of visual space. Perception & Psychophysics 59:456–69.
[rMAA]

Briscoe, T., ed. (2002) Linguistic evolution through language acquisition: Formal

and computational models. Cambridge University Press.

[rMAA]

Bauer, G. & Johnson, C. M. (1994) Trained motor imitation by bottlenose dolphins

Brown, R., Hobson, R. P., Lee, A. & Stevenson, J. (1997) Are there “autistic-like”

(Tursiops truncatus). Perceptual and Motor Skills 79:1307–15.

[BI]

Bergen, B. K. (2001) Nativization processes in L1 Esperanto. Journal of Child

Language 28:575–95.

[AW]

Bergman, T., Beehner, J., Cheney, D. L. & Seyfarth, R. M. (2003) Hierarchical

classification by rank and kinship in baboons. Science 302:1234–36.
[RMS]

Bickerton, D. (1990) Language and species. University of Chicago Press.
(1995) Language and human behavior. University of Washington Press.

[DB]

features in congenitally blind children? Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry 38:693–703.

[HT]

Burgess, N., Jeffery, K. F. & O’Keefe, J., eds. (1999) The hippocampal and parietal

foundations of spatial cognition. Oxford University Press.

[aMAA]
Butler, A. B. & Hodos, W. (1996) Comparative vertebrate neuroanatomy:

Evolution and adaptation. Wiley.

[rMAA]

Bybee, J. (2001) Phonology and language use. Cambridge University Press.

[rMAA]

[aMAA, HF, WTF]

Byrne, R. W. (2003) Imitation as behaviour parsing. Philosophical Transactions of

(1996) Language and human behaviour, second edition. University College

the Royal Society of London. Series B 358:529–36.

[aMAA]

London Press.

[AW]

(2003) Symbol and structure: A comprehensive framework for language

evolution. In: Language evolution, ed. M. H. Christiansen & S. Kirby, pp. 77–
93. Oxford University Press.

[DB, WTF]

Billard, A. (2000) Learning motor skills by imitation: A biologically inspired robotic

model. Cybernetics & Systems 32:155–93.

[EB]

Binder, J. R., Liebenthal, E., Possing, E. T., Medler, D. A. & Ward, B. D. (2004)

Neural correlates of sensory and decision processes in auditory object
identification. Nature Neuroscience 7:295–301.

[JPR]

Binkofski, F., Buccino, G., Stephan, K. M., Rizzolatti, G., Seitz, R. J. & Freund,
H.-J. (1999) A parieto-premotor network for object manipulation: Evidence
from neuroimaging. Experimental Brain Research 128:210–13.

[aMAA]

Bischoff-Grethe, A., Crowley, M. G. & Arbib, M. A. (2003) Movement inhibition
and next sensory state prediction in basal ganglia. In: The basal ganglia, vol.
VI, ed. A. M. Graybiel, M. R. Delong, & S. T. Kitai, pp. 267–77. Kluwer/
Plenum.

[aMAA]

Blumenthal, A., ed. and trans. (1970) Language and psychology: Historical aspects

of psycholinguistics. John Wiley.

[DM]

Boesch, C. & Boesch, H. (1983) Optimization of nut-cracking with natural

hammers by wild chimpanzees. Behavior 83:265–86.

[arMAA]

Bookheimer, S. (2002) Functional MRI of language: New approaches to

160

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

Byrne, R. W. & Russon, A. E. (1998) Learning by imitation: A hierarchical

approach. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 21(5):667–84.

[JHGW]

Byrne, R. W. & Whiten A. (1988) Machiavellian intelligence: Social expertise and

the evolution of intellect in monkeys, apes and humans. Oxford University
Press.

[JHGW]

Caldwell, C.A. & Whiten, A. (2002) Evolutionary perspectives on imitation: Is a

comparative psychology of social learning possible? Animal Cognition
5(4):193–208.

[BI]

Cangelosi, A. & Parisi, D., eds. (2002) Simulating the evolution of language.

Springer.

[rMAA, DP]

Carey, D. P., Perrett, D. I. & Oram, M. W. (1997) Recognizing, understanding, and

producing action. In: Handbook of neuropsychology: Action and cognition,
vol. 11, ed. M. Jeannerod & J. Grafman, pp. 111–130. Elsevier.
[aMAA]
Carr, L., Iacoboni, M., Dubeau, M.-C., Mazziotta, J. C. & Lenzi, G. L. (2003)

Neural mechanisms of empathy in humans: A relay from neural systems for
imitation to limbic areas. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
USA 100(9):5497–502.

[rMAA]

Carruthers, P. & Boucher, J. (1998) Introduction: Opening up options. In:

Language and thought: Interdisciplinary themes, ed. P. Carruthers & J.
Boucher, pp. 1–18. Cambridge University Press.

[HF]

Casey, S. K. (2003) “Agreement” in gestures and signed languages: The use of

References/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

directionality to indicate referents involved in actions. Ph.D. Dissertation in
Linguistics, University of California at San Diego.

[aMAA]

Darwin, C. (1871) The descent of man and selection in relation to sex. John Murray.

[WTF]

Cavada, C. & Goldman-Rakic, P. S. (1989) Posterior parietal cortex in rhesus

(1872/1965) The expression of the emotions in man and animals. University of

monkey: II. Evidence for segregated corticocortical networks linking sensory
and limbic areas with the frontal lobe. Journal of Comparative Neurology
287:422–45.

[aMAA]

Cavalli-Sforza, L. (1996) Geni, popoli e lingue. Adelphi. (German edition: Gene,

Völker und Sprachen, trans. G. Memmert. Carl Hanser Verlag).

[BK]

Cavalli-Sforza, L. & Feldman, M. (1981) Cultural transmission and evolution.

Princeton University Press.

[BK]

Chicago Press.

[aMAA]

Dave, A. S. & Margoliash, D. (2000) Song replay during sleep and computational

rules for sensorimotor vocal learning. Science 290:812–16.

[IMP]

Dawkins, R. (1996) Climbing Mount Improbable. Norton.
Deacon, T. W. (1989) The neural circuitry underlying primate calls and human

[CB]

language. Human Evolution 4:367–401.

[EG]

(1997) The symbolic species: The co-evolution of language and the brain. W. W.

Cavalli-Sforza, L., Menozzi, P. & Piazza, A. (1996) The history and geography of

Norton.

[aMAA, DB, HF]

human genes. (Abridged paperback edition). Princeton University Press.
[rMAA]

Chao, L. L. & Martin, A. (2000) Representation of manipulable man-made objects

in the dorsal stream. Neuroimage 12:478–84.

[rMAA]

Cheney, D. L. & Seyfarth, R. M. (1982) How vervet monkeys perceive their grunts:

Field playback experiments. Animal Behaviour 30:739–51.

[RMS]

(1988) Assessment of meaning and the detection of unreliable signals in vervet

monkeys. Animal Behaviour 36:477–86.

[RMS]

(1990) How monkeys see the world: Inside the mind of another species.

University of Chicago Press.

[RMS]

(1998) Why monkeys don’t have language. The Tanner Lectures on Human

Values 19:175–219.

[RMS]

(in press) Constraints and preadaptations in the earliest stages of language

evolution. Linguistic Review.

[rMAA, RMS]

Decety, J., Grezes, J., Costes, N., Perani, D., Jeannerod, M., Procyk, E., Grassi, F.

& Fazio, F. (1997) Brain activity during observation of actions: Influence of
action content and subject’s strategy. Brain 120:1763–77.

[aMAA]

Demiris, Y. & Hayes, G. (2002) Imitation as a dual-route process featuring

predictive and learning components: A biologically plausible computational
model. In: Imitation in animals and artifacts, ed. K. Dautenhahn & C.
Nehaniv. MIT Press.

[EB]

Demiris, Y. & Johnson, M. (2003) Distributed, predictive perception of actions: A

biologically inspired robotics architecture for imitation and learning.
Connection Science Journal 15(4):231–43.

[EB]

Di Ferdinando, A. & Parisi, D. (2004) Internal representations of sensory input re-
flect the motor output with which organisms respond to the input. In: Seeing
and thinking, ed. A. Carsetti, pp. 115–41. Kluwer.

[DP]

Dixon, R. M. W. (1997) The rise and fall of languages. Cambridge University Press.

Choe, Y. & Bhamidipati, S. K. (2004) Autonomous acquisition of the meaning of

[arMAA]

sensory states through sensory-invariance driven action. In: Biologically
inspired approaches to advanced information technology, ed. A. J. Ijspeert &
M. Murata. Springer.

[rMAA]

Dominey, P. F., Arbib, M. A. & Joseph, J.-P. (1995) A model of corticostriatal

plasticity for learning associations and sequences, Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience 7:311–36.

[aMAA]

Chomsky, C. (1969) The acquisition of syntax in children from 5 to 10. MIT Press.

Dominey, P. F., Hoen, M., Lelekov, T. & Blanc, J. M. (2003) Neurological basis of

[aMAA]

Chomsky, N. (1965) Aspects of the theory of syntax. MIT Press.
Clark, A. (1999) An embodied cognitive science? Trends in Cognitive Sciences

[AW]

3:345–51.

[rMAA]

Clayton, N. S., Bussey, T. J. & Dickinson, A. (2003) Can animals recall the past and

plan for the future?  Nature Reviews Neuroscience 4:685–91.

[IMP]
Clegg, M. & Aiello, L. C. (2000) Paying the price of speech? An analysis of
mortality statistics for choking on food. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology (Supplement) 30:126.

[rMAA]

Cole, J., Gallagher, S. & McNeill, D. (2002) Gesture following deafferentation: A

phenomenologically informed experimental study. Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences 1:49–67.

[DM]

Corballis, M. C. (2002). From hand to mouth: The origins of language. Princeton

University Press.

[rMAA, KE, DM]

(2003a) From mouth to hand: Gesture, speech, and the evolution of right-

handedness. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 26(2):199–260.
PFM] 

[rMAA, CB,

(2003b) Laterality and human speciation. In: Speciation of modern Homo
sapiens, ed. T. J. Crow. Proceedings of the British Academy 106:137–52.
[aMAA]

language and sequential cognition: Evidence from simulation, aphasia and
ERP studies. Brain and Language 86:207–25.

[rMAA]

Donald, M. (1993) Origins of the modern mind. Harvard University Press.

[WTF]
(1998) Mimesis and the executive suite: Missing links in language evolution. In:
Approaches to the evolution of language: Social and cognitive bases, ed. J. R.
Hurford, M. Studdert-Kennedy & C. Knight, pp. 44–67. Cambridge
University Press.

[aMAA]

Doupe, A. & Kuhl, P. (1999) Birdsong and human speech: Common themes and

mechanisms. Annual Review of Neuroscience 22:567–631.

[arMAA]

Ehrsson, H. H., Fagergren, A., Johansson, R. S. & Forssberg, H. (2003) Evidence
for the involvement of the posterior parietal cortex in coordination of fingertip
forces for grasp stability in manipulation. Journal of Neurophysiology
90:2978–86.

[aMAA]

Ehrsson, H. H., Spence, C. & Passingham, R. E. (2004) That’s my hand! Activity in

premotor cortex reflects feeling of ownership of a limb. Science 305:875–77.
[BI]

Ellis, R. & Tucker, M. (2000) Micro-affordance: The potentiation of components of

action by seen objects. British Journal of Psychology 91:451–71.

[DP]
Emmorey, K. (2002) Language, cognition, and the brain: Insights from sign

language research. Erlbaum.

[arMAA, KE]

(2004) FOXP2 and the mirror system. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 8:95–96.

Evans, N. (2003) Culture, context and structuration in Australian languages.

[rMAA, HT]

Corina, D. P., Poizner, H., Bellugi, U., Feinberg, T., Dowd, D. & O’Grady-Batch,
L. (1992a) Dissociation between linguistic and nonlinguistic gestural systems:
A case for compositionality. Brain and Language 43(3):414–47.

[arMAA]

Corina, D. P., Vaid, J. & Bellugi, U. (1992b) The linguistic basis of left hemisphere

specialization. Science 255:1258–60.

[aMAA]

Corina, D. P., Jose-Robertson, L. S., Guillemin, A. High, J. & Braun, A. R. (2003)

Language lateralization in a bimanual language. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience 15(5):718–30.

[aMAA]

Annual Review of Anthropology 32:13–40.

[aMAA]

Fabrega, H. (1997) Evolution of sickness and healing. University of California

Press.

[HF]

(2002) Origins of psychopathology: Phylogenetic and cultural basis of mental

illness. Rutgers University Press.

[HF]

(2004) Consciousness and emotions are minimized. Behavioral and Brain

Sciences 27(6):736–37. [commentary on Atran, S. & Norenzayan, A. (2004)
Religion’s evolutionary landscape: Counterintuition, commitment, compassion,
communion. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 27(6):713–30.

[HF]

Coulmas, F. (2003) Writing systems: An introduction to their linguistic analysis.

Fadiga, L., Craighero, L., Buccino, G. & Rizzolatti, G. (2002) Speech listening

Cambridge University Press.

[aMAA]

Croft, W. (2001) Radical construction grammar: Syntactic theory in typological

perspective. Oxford University Press.

[rMAA]

specifically modulates the excitability of tongue muscles: A TMS study.
European Journal of Neuroscience 15:399–402.

[aMAA]

Fagg, A. H. & Arbib, M. A. (1992) A model of primate visual-motor conditional

Crow, T. J. (2002a) Sexual selection, timing and an X-Y homologous gene: Did

learning. Adaptive Behavior 1:1–37.

[rMAA]

Homo sapiens speciate on the Y chromosome? In: The speciation of modern
Homo sapiens, ed. T. J. Crow, pp. 197–216. Oxford University Press.

[aMAA]

(2002b) The speciation of modern Homo sapiens. Oxford University Press.

[HF]

Culham, J. C., Danckert, S. L., DeSouza, J. F. X., Gati, J. S., Menon, R. S. &

Goodale, M. A. (2003) Visually guided grasping produces fMRI activation in
dorsal but not ventral stream brain areas. Experimental Brain Research
153:180–89.

[aMAA]

Damasio, A. (1999) The feeling of what happens: Body and emotion in the making

of consciousness. Harcourt Brace.

[HF]

(1998) Modeling parietal-premotor interactions in primate control of grasping.

Neural Networks 11:1277–303.

[aMAA]

Fairman, T. (2000) English pauper letters 1800–34, and the English language. In:
Letter writing as a social practice, ed. D. Barton & N. Hall, pp. 63–82. John
Benjamins.

[AW]

Falk, D. (2004a) Prelinguistic evolution in early hominins: Whence motherese.

Behavioral and Brain Sciences 27(4):491–503.

[rMAA, EG, PFM]

(2004b) The roles of infant crying and motherese during prelinguistic evolution
in early hominins. American Journal of Physical Anthropology (Suppl.) 38:93.
[EG]

D’Andrade, R. D. (1987) A folk model of the mind. In: Cultural models in

Ferguson, C. A. (1964) Baby talk in six languages. American Anthropologist

language and thought, ed. D. Holland & N. Quinn, pp. 112–48. Cambridge
University Press.

[HF]

66:103–14.

[PFM]

Ferrari, P. F., Gallese, V., Rizzolatti, G. & Fogassi, L. (2003) Mirror neurons

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

161

References/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

responding to the observation of ingestive and communicative mouth actions
in the monkey ventral premotor cortex. European Journal of Neuroscience
17(8):1703–14.

[arMAA]

Fichtel, C. & Hammerschmidt, K. (2002) Responses of red-fronted lemurs to

experimentally-modified alarm calls: Evidence for urgency-based changes in
call structure. Ethology 108:763–77.

[RMS]

Fischer, J. (1998) Barbary macaques categorize shrill barks into two calls types.

Animal Behaviour 55:799–807.

[RMS]

Fischer, J. & Hammerschmidt, K. (2001) Functional referents and acoustic
similarity revisited: The case of Barbary macaque alarm calls. Animal
Cognition 4:29–35.

[RMS]

Fischer, J., Hammerschmidt, K., Seyfarth, R. M. & Cheney, D. L. (2001a) Acoustic

features of female chacma baboon barks. Ethology 107:33–54.

[RMS]

Fischer, J., Metz, M., Cheney, D. L. & Seyfarth, R. M. (2001b) Baboon responses

to graded bark variants. Animal Behaviour 61:925–31.

[RMS]

Floel, A., Ellger, T., Breitenstein, C. & Knecht, S. (2003) Language perception
activates the hand motor cortex: Implications for motor theories of speech
perception. European Journal of Neuroscience 18(3):704–708.
[arMAA]

Floreano, D. & Urzelai, J. (2000) Evolutionary robots with on-line self-organization

and behavioral fitness. Neural Networks 13:431–43.

[EB]
[rMAA]

Fodor, J. A. (1995) The language of thought. Crowell.
Fogassi, L. & Ferrari, P. F. (in press) Mirror neurons, gestures and language
evolution. Interaction Studies: Social Behaviour and Communication in
Biological and Artificial Systems.

[arMAA]

Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., Fadiga, L. & Rizzolatti, G. (1998) Neurons responding to
the sight of goal directed hand/arm actions in the parietal area PF (7b) of the
macaque monkey. Social Neuroscience Abstracts 24:257.

[aMAA]

Foley, R. A. (2001) Evolutionary perspectives on the origins of human social

institutions. In: The origin of human social institutions, ed. W. G. Runciman,
pp. 177–96. Oxford University Press.

[HF]

Foundas, A. L., Eure, K. F., Luevano, L. F. & Weinberger, D. R. (1998) MRI

asymmetries of Broca’s area: The pars triangularis and pars opercularis. Brain
and Language 64(3):282–96.

[AMB]

Friederici, A. D., Kotz, S. A., Steinhauer, K. & von Cramon, D. Y. (2003) The

neural basis of the prosody-syntax interplay: The role of the corpus callosum.
Brain and Language 87:133–34.

[BK]

Fritz, J. B., Becker, D., Mishkin, M. & Saunders, R. C. (1999) A comparison of the
effects of medial temporal and rhinal cortical lesions on auditory recognition
memory in the rhesus monkey. Society for Neuroscience Abstracts 25:789.
[BH]

Fuster, J. M. (2002) Physiology of executive functions: The perception-action cycle.
In: Principles of frontal lobe function, ed. D. T. Stuss & R. T. Knight, pp. 96–
108. Oxford University Press.

[HF]

Galaburda, A. M. & Sanides, F. (1980) Cytoarchitectonic organization of the

human auditory cortex. Journal of Comparative Neurology 190:597–610.
[aMAA, JPR]

Glover, S. & Dixon, P. (2002) Semantics affect the planning but not control of

grasping. Experimental Brain Research 146(3):383–87.

[aMAA]

Glover, S., Rosenbaum, D. A., Graham, J. & Dixon, P. (2004) Grasping the

meaning of words. Experimental Brain Research 154(1):103–108.

[aMAA]

Goodale, M. A., Milner, A. D., Jakobson, L. S. & Carey, D. P. (1991) A neurological
dissociation between perceiving objects and grasping them. Nature 349:154–
56.

[aMAA]

Goodson, J. L. & Bass, A. H. (2002) Vocal-acoustic circuitry and descending vocal

pathways in teleost fish: Convergence with terrestrial vertebrates reveals
conserved traits. Journal of Comparative Neurology 448:298–322.
[EG]

Grace, G. (2002) Collateral damage from linguistics? 3: The role of culture-

centrism. Ethnolinguistic Notes 4(23). Available at: http://www2.hawaii.edu/
~grace/elniv23.html. (Online Journal).

[AW]

Grafton, S. T., Arbib, M. A., Fadiga, L. & Rizzolatti, G. (1996) Localization of
grasp representations in humans by PET: 2. Observation compared with
imagination. Experimental Brain Research 112:103–11.

[aMAA]

Greenfield, P. M. (1991) Language, tools and brain: The ontogeny and phylogeny
of hierarchically organized behavior. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 14:531–
95.

[HF, IMP]

Grezes, J. & Decety, J. (2001) Functional anatomy of execution, mental simulation,

observation and verb generation of actions: A meta-analysis. Human Brain
Mapping 12:1–19.

[aMAA]

(2002) Does visual perception of object afford action? Evidence from a

neuroimaging study. Neuropsychologia 40:212–22.

[aMAA]

Grezes, J., Armony, J. L., Rowe, J. & Passingham, R. E. (2003) Activations related

to “mirror” and “canonical” neurones in the human brain: An fMRI study.
Neuroimage 18(4):928–37.

[aMAA]

Grezes, J., Costes, N. & Decety, J. (1998) Top-down effect of strategy on the
perception of human biological motion: A PET investigation. Cognitive
Neuropsychology 15:553–82.

[aMAA]

Guenther, F. H. (1995) Speech sound acquisition, coarticulation and rate effects in
a neural network model of speech production. Psychological Review 102:594–
621.

[BH]

Guenther, F. H. & Ghosh, S. S. (2003) A model of cortical and cerebellar function

in speech. Proceedings of the XVth International Congress of Phonetic
Sciences, ed. M. J. Sole, D. Recasens & J. Romero. pp. 169–73. Universitat
Autonoma de Barcelona.

[BH]

Guillaume, P. (1927/1973) First stages of sentence formation in children’s speech.
In: Studies in child language development, ed. C. A. Ferguson & D. I. Slobin,
pp. 522–41. Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

[AW]

Hallowell, A. I. (1960) Self, society, and culture in phylogenetic perspective. In:

The evolution of man: Mind, culture, and society, vol. 2, Evolution after
Darwin, ed. S. Tax, pp. 309–71. University of Chicago Press.

[HF]

Hamzei, F., Rijntjes, M., Dettmers, C., Glauche, V., Weiller, C. & Buchel, C.

(2003) The human action recognition system and its relationship to Broca’s
area: An fMRI study. Neuroimage 19(3):637–44.

[aMAA]

Gallese, V. (2003) The roots of empathy: The shared manifold hypothesis and the

Hanakawa, T., Honda, M., Sawamoto, N., Okada, T., Yonekura, Y., Fukuyama, H.

neural basis of intersubjectivity. Psychopathology 36:171–80.

[rMAA]

Gallese, V., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L. & Rizzolatti, G. (1996) Action recognition in the

premotor cortex. Brain 119:593–609.

[aMAA]

& Shibasaki, H. (2002) The role of rostral Brodmann area 6 in mental-
operation tasks: An integrative neuroimaging approach. Cerebral Cortex
12(11):1157–70.

[aMAA]

Gallese, V. & Goldman, A. (1998) Mirror neurons and the simulation theory of

Harris, R. (2002) Why words really do not stay still. Times Literary Supplement 26

mind-reading. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2:493–501.

[JHGW]

July, 5182:30.

[DM]

Gamble, C. (1994) Timewalkers: The prehistory of global colonization. Harvard

Hast, M. H., Fischer, J. M., Wetzel, A. B. & Thompson, V. E. (1974) Cortical motor

University Press.

[aMAA]

Geertz, C. (1973) The growth of culture and the evolution of mind. In: The

interpretation of cultures, ed. C. Geertz, pp. 55–83. Basic Books.

[HF]
Gelfand, J. R. & Bookheimer, S. Y. (2003) Dissociating neural mechanisms of
temporal sequencing and processing phonemes. Neuron 38(5):831–42.
[aMAA]

Gemba, H., Miki, N. & Sasaki, K. (1997) Cortical field potentials preceding

vocalization in monkeys. Acta Otolaryngologica Supplemental 532:96–98.
[CB]

representation of the laryngeal muscles in Macaca mulatto. Brain Research
73:229–40.

[CB]

Hauser, M. D. (1996) The evolution of communication. MIT Press/Bradford

Books.

[aMAA, RMS]

(1998) Functional referents and acoustic similarity: Field playback experiments

with rhesus monkeys. Animal Behaviour 55:1647–58.

[RMS]

Hauser, M. D. & Anderson, K. (1994) Left hemisphere dominance for processing

vocalizations in adult, but not infant, rhesus monkeys: Field experiments.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 91:3946–48.

[RMS]

Gentilucci, M. (2003a) Grasp observation influences speech production. European

Hauser, M. D., Chomsky, N. & Fitch, W. T. (2002) The faculty of language: What is

Journal of Neuroscience 17(1):179–84.

[arMAA]

(2003b) Object motor representation and language. Experimental Brain

Research 153:260–65.

[rMAA, DP]

Gerlach, C., Law, I. & Paulson, O. B. (2002) When action turns into words.

Activation of motor-based knowledge during categorization of manipulable
objects. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 14(8):1230–39.

[aMAA]

Ghazanfar, A. & Hauser, M. D. (2001) The auditory behavior of primates: A

neuroethological perspective. Current Opinions in Neurobiology 11:712–20.
[RMS]

Ghazanfar, A. A., ed. (2003) Primate audition: Ethology and neurobiology. CRC

Press.

[aMAA]

it, who has it, and how did it evolve? Science 298:1569–79.

[aMAA]

Heffner, H. E. & Heffner, R. S. (1984) Temporal lobe lesions and perception of

species-specific vocalizations by macaques. Science 226:75–76.

[RMS]

Heilman, K. M., Blonder, L. X., Bowers, D. & Crucian, G. P. (2000) Neurological

disorders and emotional dysfunction. In: The neuropsychology of emotion.
Series in affective science, ed. J. C. Borod. Oxford University Press.

[AMB]
Heilman, K. M., Coyle, J. M., Gonyea, E. F. & Geschwind, N. (1973) Apraxia and

agraphia in a left-hander. Brain 96:21–28.

[AMB]

Heilman K. M. & Rothi L. J. G. (2003) Apraxia. In: Clinical Neuropsychology, 4th

edition, ed. K. M. Heilman & E. Valenstein. Oxford University Press.

[AMB]

Heine, B. (1997) Cognitive foundations of grammar. Oxford University Press.

Gibson, J. J. (1979) The ecological approach to visual perception. Houghton

[aMAA]

Mifflin.

[aMAA]

Givon, T. (2004) Teaching grammar to apes. Final Project Report, NIH Grant No.

2P01 HD06016–29 SUB: 0015.

[DB]

Heiser, M., Iacoboni, M., Maeda, F., Marcus, J. & Mazziotta, J. C. (2003) The

essential role of Broca’s area in imitation. European Journal of Neuroscience
17:1981–86.

[aMAA]

162

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

References/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

Herbert, M. R., Harris, G. J., Adrien, K. T., Ziegler, D. A., Makris, N., Kennedy, D.

Jackson, J. H. (1878–79) On affections of speech from the disease of the brain.

N., Lange, N. T., Chabris, C. F., Bakardjiev, A., Hodgson, J., Takeoka, M.,
Tager-Flusberg, H. & Caviness, V. S. (2002) Abnormal asymmetry in language
association cortex in autism. Annals of Neurology 52:588–96.

[HT]

Brain 1:304–30; 2:203–22, 323–56.

[rMAA]

Janis, I. L. (1982) Groupthink: Psychological studies of policy decisions and

fiascoes, 2nd edition. Houghton Mifflin.

[BK]

Hewes, G. W. (1973) Primate communication and the gestural origin of language.

Janzen, T. & Shaffer, B. (2002) Gesture as the substrate in the process of ASL

Current Anthropology 14:5–24.

[aMAA, PFM]

(1996) A history of the study of language origins and the gestural primacy

hypothesis. In: Handbook of human symbolic evolution, ed. A. Lock & C. R.
Peters. Oxford University Press.

[PFM]

Hickok, G., Bellugi, U. & Klima, E. S. (1998) What’s right about the neural

organization of sign language? A perspective on recent neuroimaging results.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences 12:465–68.

[aMAA]

grammaticalization. In: Modality and structure in signed and spoken
languages, ed. R. P. Meier, K. Cormier & D. Quinto-Pozos, pp. 199–223.
Cambridge University Press.

[KE]

Jarvis, E. D. & Mello, C. V. (2000) Molecular mapping of brain areas involved in
parrot vocal communication. Journal of Comparative Neurology 419:1–31.
[IMP]

Jeannerod, M., Decety, J. & Michel, F. (1994) Impairment of grasping movements.

Hill, E. L. (2001) Non-specific nature of specific language impairment: A review of

Neuropsychologia 32(4):369–80.

[aMAA]

the literature with regard to concomitant motor impairments. International
Journal of Language and Communication Disorders 36:149–71.

[HT]

Jordan, M. I. & Rumelhart, D. E. (1992) Forward models: Supervised learning

with a distal teacher. Cognitive Science 16:307–54.

[rMAA]

Hill, J. C. (1983) A computational model of language acquisition in the two-year-

Jürgens, U. (1997) Primate communication: Signaling, vocalization. In:

old. Cognition and Brain Theory 6:287–317.

[rMAA]

Hobson, R. P. & Bishop, M. (2003) The pathogenesis of autism: Insights from

congenital blindness. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London B 358:335–44.

[HT]

Encyclopedia of neuroscience, 2nd edition. Elsevier.

[aMAA]

(1998) Neuronal control of mammalian vocalization, with special reference to

the squirrel monkey. Naturwissenschaften 85(8):376–88.

[rMAA, WTF, EG]

(2002) Neural pathways underlying vocal control. Neuroscience and

Hockett, C. F. (1959) Animal “languages” and human language. Human Biology

Biobehavioral Reviews 26:235–58.

[EG]

31:32–39.

[IMP]

(1978) In search of Jove’s brow. American Speech 53:243–313.

[rMAA, PFM]
Hofstadter, D. (1995) Fluid concepts and creative analogies: Computer models of

the fundamental mechanisms of thought. Basic Books.

[BI]

Holland, J. H. (1992) Genetic algorithms. Scientific American 267:66–72.
Holstein, B. I. (1970) Use of metaphor to induce innovative thinking in fourth

[DP]

grade children. Ph.D. thesis, School of Education, Boston University, Boston,
MA.

[BI]

Hornak, J., Bramham, J., Rolls, E. T., Morris, R. G., O’Doherty, J., Bullock, P. R. 

& Polkey, C. E. (2003) Changes in emotion after circumscribed surgical
lesions of the orbitofrontal and cingulate cortices. Brain 126:1691–712.
[BK]

Horwitz, B. (2005) Integrating neuroscientific data across spatiotemporal scales.

Comptes rendus Biologies 328:109–18.

[BH]

(2003) From mouth to mouth and hand to hand: On language evolution.

Behavioral and Brain Sciences 26(2):229–30.

[CB]

Jürgens, U. & Alipour, M. (2002) A comparative study on the cortico-hypoglossal
connections in primates, using biotine dextranamine. Neuroscience Letters
328:245–48.

[CB]

Kaas, J. H. (1993) Evolution of multiple areas and modules within neocortex.

Perspectives on Developmental Neurobiology 1:101–107.

[rMAA]

Kanter, S. L., Day, A. L., Heilman, K. M. & Gonzalez Rothi, L. J. (1986) Pure word

deafness: A possible explanation of transient deterioration following EC-IC
bypass. Neurosurgery 18:186–89.

[AMB]

Kaplan, J. T. & Iacoboni, M. (2005) Brain activations related to hearing and seeing
an action. Presented at the Cognitive Neuroscience Society Annual Meeting,
New York, April 2005.

[JTK]

(in preparation) Multisensory coding of perceived actions in the motor system.

Horwitz, B., Amunts, K., Bhattacharyya, R., Patkin, D., Jeffries, K., Zilles, K. &

[rMAA]

Braun, A. R. (2003) Activation of Broca’s area during the production of spoken
and signed language: A combined cytoarchitectonic mapping and PET
analysis. Neuropsychologia 41(14):1868–76.

[aMAA]

Horwitz, B. & Tagamets, M.-A. (2003) Synthetic functional brain imaging. In: The
handbook of brain theory and neural networks, 2nd edition, ed. M. A. Arbib.
MIT Press.

[rMAA]

Hunt, G. R. & Gray, R. D. (2002) Diversification and cumulative evolution in New
Caledonian crow tool manufacture. Proceedings of the Royal Society London.
Series B 270:867–74.

[aMAA]

Hurford, J. R. (2003) The neural basis of predicate-argument structure. Behavioral

and Brain Sciences 26(3):261–83.

[rMAA]

(2004) Language beyond our grasp: What mirror neurons can, and cannot, do

for language evolution. In: Evolution of communication systems: A
comparative approach, ed. K. Oller, U. Griebel & K. Plunkett, pp. 297–313.
MIT Press.

[arMAA]

Husain, F. T., Tagamets, M.-A., Fromm, S. J., Braun, A. R. & Horwitz, B. (2004)
Relating neuronal dynamics for auditory object processing to neuroimaging
activity. NeuroImage 21:1701–20.

[BH]

Iacoboni, M., Koski, L. M., Brass, M., Bekkering, H., Woods, R. P., Dubeau, M.

C., Mazziotta, J. C. & Rizzolatti, G. (2001) Reafferent copies of imitated
actions in the right superior temporal cortex. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Science USA 98:13995–99.

[aMAA]

Iacoboni, M., Woods, R. P., Brass, M., Bekkering, H., Mazziotta, J. C. & Rizzolatti,
G. (1999) Cortical mechanisms of human imitation. Science 286(5449):2526–
28.

[aMAA, JHGW]

Indurkhya, B. (1992) Metaphor and cognition. Kluwer Academic Publishers.

[BI]

(1994) The thesis “all knowledge is metaphorical” and meanings of “metaphor.”

Metaphor and Symbolic Activity 9(1):61–73.

[BI]

Kegl, J., Senghas, A. & Coppola, M. (1999) Creation through contact: Sign

language emergence and sign language change in Nicaragua. In Language
creation and language change: Creolization, diachrony, and development, ed.
M. DeGraff, pp. 179–237. MIT Press.

[KE]

Kemmerer, D., Chandrasekaran, B. & Tranel, D. (submitted) A case of impaired
verbalization but preserved gesticulation of motion events: Investigating the
language-specific representation of space from a neuropsychological
perspective.

[rMAA] 

Kendon, A. (1988) Sign languages of aboriginal Australia: Cultural, semiotic and

communicative perspectives. Cambridge University Press.

[rMAA, DM]

Kertesz, A., Ferro, J. M. & Shewan, C. M. (1984) Apraxia and aphasia: The
functional-anatomical basis for their dissociation. Neurology 34:40–47.

[AMB]
Keysers, C., Kohler, E., Umilta, M. A., Nanetti, L., Fogassi, L. & Gallese, V. (2003)

Audiovisual mirror neurons and action recognition. Experimental Brain
Research 153(4):628–36.

[JTK]

Kimura, D. (1993) Neuromotor mechanisms in human communication (Oxford

Psychology Series No. 20). Oxford University Press/Clarendon Press.
[aMAA]

Kirby, S. (2000) Syntax without natural selection: How compositionality emerges
from vocabulary in a population of learners. In: The evolutionary emergence
of language, ed. C. Knight, M. Studdert-Kennedy & J. R. Hurford. Cambridge
University Press.

[arMAA]

Kirzinger, A. & Jürgens, U. (1982) Cortical lesion effects and vocalization in the

squirrel monkey. Brain Research 233:299–315.

[CB]

Kita, S. & Özyürek, A. (2003). What does cross-linguistic variation in semantic

coordination of speech and gesture reveal? Evidence for an interface
representation of spatial thinking and speaking. Journal of Memory and
Language 48(1):16–32.

[rMAA]

(1998) On creation of features and change of representation. Journal of Japanese

Knight, C. (1991) Blood relations: Menstruation and the origins of culture.

Cognitive Science Society 5(2):43–56.

[BI]

Ingold, T. (1996) Language is the essence of culture. In: Key debates in

anthropology, ed. T. Ingold, pp. 147–98. Routledge.

[HF]

Ito, M. (2005) Bases and implications of learning in the cerebellum – adaptive

control and internal model mechanism. Progress in Brain Research
148:95 –109.

[rMAA]

Yale University Press.

[HF]

Kohler, E., Keysers, C., Umiltá, M. A., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V. & Rizzolatti, G.
(2002) Hearing sounds, understanding actions: Action representation in
mirror neurons. Science 297(5582):846–48.

[arMAA, JTK, HT]

Kohler, W. (1917/1927) The mentality of apes, trans. E. Winter. Routledge &

Kegan Paul. (Original work published 1917).

[PNP]

Izumi, A. & Kojima, S. (2004) Matching vocalizations to vocalizing faces in a

Koski, L., Wohlschlager, A., Bekkering, H., Woods, R. P., Dubeau, M. C.,

chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes). Animal Cognition 7:179–84.

[CB]

Jackendoff, R. (1983) Semantics and cognition. MIT Press.

[HF]

(1999) Possible stages in the evolution of the language capacity. Trends in

Cognitive Sciences 3(7):272–79.

[WTF]

(2002) Foundations of language: Brain, meaning, grammar, evolution. Oxford

University Press.

[aMAA, PFM]

Mazziotta, J. C. & Iacoboni, M. (2002) Modulation of motor and premotor
activity during imitation of target-directed actions. Cerebral Cortex 12:847–
55.

[aMAA]

Kozima, H., Nakagawa, C. & Yano, H. (2003) Can a robot empathize with people?

Proceedings of the Eighth International Symposium on Artificial Life and
Robotics (AROB 08), pp. 518–19.

[BI]

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

163

References/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

Kripke, S. A. (1982) Wittgenstein on rules and private language. Harvard

McNeill, D. (1992) Hand and mind: What gestures reveal about thought.

University Press.

[rMAA]

University of Chicago Press.

[DM]

Krubitzer, L. (1998) Constructing the neocortex: Influences on the pattern of

(2000) Introduction. In: Language and gesture, ed. D. McNeill, pp. 1–10.

organization in mammals. In: Brain and mind: Evolutionary perspectives, ed.
M. S. Gazzaniga & J. S. Altman, pp. 19–34. Human Frontier Science
Program.

[rMAA]

Kubovy, M. & Van Valkenburg, D. (2001) Auditory and visual objects. Cognition

80:97–126.

[BH]

Kuczaj, S. A., Gory, J. D. & Xitco, M. J. (1998) Using programs to solve problems:

Imitation versus insight. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 21:695–96.

[BI]

Kurthen, M. (1992) Neurosemantik. Grundlagen einer praxiologischen kognitiven

Neurowissenschaft. Ferdinand Enke.

[rMAA]

Cambridge University Press.

[DM]

Meltzoff, A. N. & Decety, J. (2003) What imitation tells us about social cognition: A

rapprochement between developmental psychology and cognitive
neuroscience. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London.
Series B: Biological Sciences 358(1431):491–500.

[rMAA, JHGW]

Meltzoff, A. N. & Prinz, W. (2002) The imitative mind: Development, evolution
and brain bases. In: Cambridge studies in cognitive development, ed. K. W.
Fischer & G. Hatano. Cambridge University Press.

[JHGW]

Miall, R. C. (2003) Connecting mirror neurons and forward models. NeuroReport

Lai, C. S., Fisher, S. E., Hurst, J. A., Vargha-Khadem, F. & Monaco, A. P. (2001) A

14:2135–37.

[rMAA]

forkhead-domain gene is mutated in a severe speech and language disorder.
Nature 413:519–23.

[HT]

Langacker, R. (1987) Foundations of cognitive grammar, vol. 1. Stanford University

Press.

[aMAA]

(1991) Foundations of cognitive grammar, vol. 2. Stanford University Press.

[aMAA]

Lass, R. (1997) Historical linguistics and language change. Cambridge University

Press.

[rMAA]

Leavens, D. A. (2003) Integration of visual and vocal communication: Evidence for

Miocene origins. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 26:232–33.

[CB]

Liberman, A. M., Cooper, F. S., Shankweiler, D. P. & Studdert-Kennedy, M. (1967)

Miller, G. F. (2001) The mating mind: How sexual choice shaped the evolution of

human nature. Anchor Books.

[CY]

Minter, M. E., Hobson, R. P. & Bishop, M. (1998) Congenital visual impairment
and “theory of mind.” British Journal of Developmental Psychology 16:183–
96.

[HT]

Mitz, A. R., Godshalk, M. & Wise, S. P. (1991) Learning-dependent neuronal

activity in the premotor cortex: Activity during the acquisition of conditional
motor associations. Journal of Neuroscience 11(6):1855–72.

[rMAA]
Moore, B. R. (1992) Avian movement imitation and a new form of mimicry:

Tracing the evolution of a complex form of learning. Behaviour 12:231–63.
[WTF, BI]

Perception of the speech code. Psychological Review 74(6):431–61.
JPR]

[JTK,

Murdock, G. P. (1959) Cross-language parallels in parental kin terms.

Anthropological Linguistics 1:1–5.

[rMAA, PFM]

Lieberman, P. (2002) On the nature and evolution of the neural bases of human

Myowa-Yamakoshi, M. & Matsuzawa, T. (1999) Factors influencing imitation of

language. Yearbook of Physical Anthropology 45:36–62.

[aMAA]

Liepmann, H. (1905) Die linke Hemisphäre und das Handeln. Münchener

Medizinische Wochenshrift 49:2322–26, 2375–78.

[AMB]
(1920) Apraxia. Ergebnisse der Gesamten Medizin 1:516–43.

[AMB]

manipulatory actions in chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). Journal of
Comparative Psychology 113:128–36.

[aMAA]

Nagy, E. & Molnar, P. (2004) Homo imitans or homo provocans? The phenomenon
[rMAA]

of neonatal initiation. Infant Behavior and Development 27:57–63.

Linnankoski, I., Laakso, M.-L., Aulanko, R. & Leinonen, L. (1994) Recognition of

Newbury, D. F., Bonora, E., Lamb, J. A., Fisher, S. E., Lai, C. S., Baird, G.,

emotions in macaque vocalizations by children and adults. Language &
Communication 14:183–92.

[BK]

Locke, J. L. (1993) The child’s path to spoken language. Harvard University Press.

[PFM]

Lord, C., Risi, S., Lambrecht, L., Cook, E. H., Jr., Leventhal, B. L., DiLavore, P. C.,

Pickles, A. & Rutter, M.  (2000) The autism diagnostic observation schedule-
generic: A standard measure of social and communication deficits associated
with the spectrum of autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders
30:205–23.

[JHGW]

MacNeilage, P. F. (1998) The frame/content theory of evolution of speech

Jannoun, L., Slonims, V., Stott, C. M., Merricks, M. J., Bolton, P. F., Bailey, A.
J., Monaco, A. P., (International Molecular Genetic Study of Autism
Consortium) (2002) FOXP2 is not a major susceptibility gene for autism or
specific language impairment. American Journal of Human Genetics 70:1318–
27.

[HT]

Nishitani, N., Avikainen, S. & Hari, R. (2004) Abnormal imitation-related cortical

activation sequences in Asperger’s syndrome. Annals of Neurology 55:558–62.
[HT]

Noble, W. & Davidson, I. (1996) Human evolution, language, and mind: A
psychological and archeological inquiry. Cambridge University Press.

[HF]

production. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 21:499–546.

[aMAA, HF, PFM]

Nowak, M. A., Plotkin, J. B. & Jansen, V. A. A. (2000) The evolution of syntactic

(2003) Mouth to hand and back again? Could language have made those

journeys? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 26(2):233–34.

[rMAA, PFM]
MacNeilage, P. F. & Davis, B. L. (1990) Acquisition of speech: Frames, then

content. In: Attention and Performance XIII, ed. M Jeannerod. Erlbaum.
[PFM]

(2000) Origin of the internal structure of word forms. Science 288:527–31.
(2004) Baby talk and the origin of the word. Paper presented at the Fifth

[PFM]

International Conference on the Evolution of Language, Leipzig, Germany,
April 2004.

[PFM]

(in press a) Baby talk and the emergence of first words. Behavioral and Brain

Sciences.

[PFM]

(in press b) The frame/content theory of evolution of speech: Comparison with a

gestural origins theory. Interaction Studies: Social Behavior and
Communication in Biological and Artificial Systems.

[arMAA, PFM]

Macphail, E. M. (2000) The search for a mental Rubicon. In: The evolution of

cognition, ed. C. Heyes & L. Huber, pp. 253–72. MIT Press.

[rMAA, HF]

Makino, T. & Aihara, K. (2003) Self-observation principle for estimating the other’s

internal state: A new computational theory of communication. Mathematical
Engineering Technical Reports METR 2003–36, Department of
Mathematical Informatics, Graduate School of Information Science and
Technology, University of Tokyo.

[rMAA]

Manthey, S., Schubotz, R. I. & von Cramon, D. Y. (2003) Premotor cortex in
observing erroneous action: An fMRI study. Cognitive Brain Research
15(3):296–307.

[aMAA]

Marino, L. (2002) Convergence of complex cognitive abilities in cetaceans and

primates. Brain, Behavior and Evolution 59:21–32.

[EG]

Marom, Y., Maistros, G. & Hayes, G. (2002) Toward a mirror system for the
development of socially-mediated skills. In: Proceedings of the Second
International Workshop on Epigenetic Robotics: Modeling Cognitive
Development in Robotic Systems, Edinburgh, Scotland, vol. 94, ed. C. Prince,
Y. Demiris, Y. Marom, H. Kozima & C. Balkenius. Lund University Cognitive
Studies.

[EB]

Matelli, M., Camarda, R., Glickstein, M. & Rizzolatti, G. (1986) Afferent and

efferent projections of the inferior area 6 in the macaque monkey. Journal of
Comparative Neurology 251:281–98.

[aMAA]

164

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

communication. Nature 404:495–98.

[aMAA]

Ochipa, C., Rothi, L. J. G. & Heilman, K. M. (1994) Conduction apraxia. Journal

of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 57:1241–44.

[AMB]

Owren, M. J., Hopp, S. L. & Seyfarth, R. M. (1992) Categorical vocal signaling in
nonhuman primates. In: Nonverbal vocal communication: Comparative and
developmental approaches, ed. H. Papousek, U. Jürgens & M. Papousek.
Cambridge University Press.

[RMS]

Owren, M. J., Seyfarth, R. M. & Cheney, D. L. (1997) The acoustic features of

vowel-like grunt calls in chacma baboons (Papio cynocephalus ursinus).
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 101:2951–63.

[RMS]

Oztop, E. & Arbib, M. A. (2002) Schema design and implementation of the grasp-

related mirror neuron system. Biological Cybernetics 87:116–40.
EB]

[aMAA,

Oztop, E., Bradley, N. S. & Arbib, M. A. (2004) Infant grasp learning: A
computational model. Experimental Brain Research 158:480–503.

[aMAA]
Papagno, C., della Sala, S. & Basso, A. (1993) Ideomotor apraxia without aphasia

and aphasia without apraxia: The anatomical support for a double dissociation.
Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 56:286–89.

[AMB]

Passingham, R. (1993) The frontal lobes and voluntary action. Oxford University

Press.

[aMAA]

Patterson, D. K. & Pepperberg, I. M. (1994) A comparative study of human and

parrot phonation: Acoustic and articulatory correlates of vowels. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 96:634–48.

[IMP]

(1998) Acoustic and articulatory correlates of stop consonants in a parrot and a

human subject. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 106:491–505.
[IMP]

Paulesu, E., Goldacre, B., Scifo, P., Cappa, S. F., Gilardi, M. C., Castigllioni, I.,

Perani, D. & Fazio, F. (1997) Functional heterogeneity of left inferior frontal
cortex as revealed by MRI. Neuroreport 8:2011–17.

[AMB]

Payne, K. & Payne, R. (1985) Large scale changes over 19 years in songs of

humpback whales in Bermuda. Zeitschrift für Tierpsychologie 68:89–114.
[EG]

Peirce, A. (1985) A review of attempts to condition operantly alloprimate

vocalizations. Primates 26:202–13.

[RMS]

Pepperberg, I. M. (1992) Proficient performance of a conjunctive, recursive task

References/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

by an African Grey parrot (Psittacus erithacus). Journal of Comparative
Psychology 106:295–305.

[IMP]

(1999) The Alex studies: Cognitive and communicative abilities of Grey parrots.

Harvard University Press.

[IMP]

(2005a) Grey parrots do not always “parrot”: Phonological awareness and

creation of new labels from existing vocalizations. In: Proceedings of the Third
International Symposium on Imitation in Animals and Artifacts, 2005
Artificial Intelligence and the Simulation of Behavior Convention.
pp. 97–104. [IMP]

(2005b) Insights into imitation in Grey parrots (Psittacus erithacus). In:

Perspectives on imitation: From neuroscience to social science, ed. S. L.
Hurley & N. Chader, pp. 243–62. MIT Press.

[IMP]

Pepperberg, I. M., Brese, K. J. & Harris, B. J. (1991) Solitary sound play during

acquisition of English vocalizations by an African Grey Parrot (Psittacus
erithacus): Possible parallels with children’s monologue speech. Applied
Psycholinguistics 12:151–78.

[IMP]

Pepperberg, I. M. & Brezinsky, M. V. (1991) Acquisition of a relative class concept

by an African Grey Parrot (Psittacus erithacus): Discriminations based on
relative size. Journal of Comparative Psychology 105:286–94.

[IMP]

Pepperberg, I. M. & Gordon, J. D. (2005) Number comprehension by an African

grey parrot (Psittacus erithacus), including a zero-like concept. Journal of
Comparative Psychology 119:197–209.

[IMP]

Pepperberg, I. M. & Shive, H. A. (2001) Simultaneous development of vocal and

physical object combinations by a Grey Parrot (Psittacus erithacus): Bottle
caps, lids, and labels. Journal of Comparative Psychology 115:376–84.

[IMP]

Perrett, D. I., Mistlin, A. J., Harries, M. H. & Chitty, A. J. (1990) Understanding

the visual appearance and consequence of hand actions. In: Vision and action:
The control of grasping, ed. M. A. Goodale, pp. 163–342. Ablex.

[aMAA]
Perrett, D., Rolls, E. T. & Cann, W. (1982) Visual neurons responsive to faces in

the monkey temporal cortex. Experimental Brain Research 47:329–42.

[DB]

(1999b) Origin of culture: Evolution applied another mechanism. Psycoloquy 10

(037). Available at: http://www.cogsci.soton.ac.uk/cgi/psyc/newpsy?10.037.
(Online Journal.)

[PNP]

(1999c) The role of motivation in the origin of language. Psycoloquy 10(069).

Available at: http://www.cogsci.soton.ac.uk/cgi/psyc/newpsy?10.069. (Online
Journal.)

[PNP]

Prudkov, P. N. & Rodina, O. N. (1999) Synthesis of purposeful processes.

Psycoloquy 10(070). Available at: http://www.cogsci.soton.ac.uk/cgi/psyc/
newpsy?10.070. (Online Journal.)

[PNP]

Pulvermüller, F. (2002) A brain perspective on language mechanisms: From
discrete neuronal ensembles to serial order. Progress in Neurobiology
67(2):85–111.

[rMAA]

Quine, W. V. (1960) Word and object. MIT Press.
Rauschecker, J. P. (1998) Cortical processing of complex sounds. Current Opinion

[CY]

in Neurobiology 8:516–21.

[JPR]

Rauschecker, J. P. & Tian, B. (2000) Mechanisms and streams for processing of

“what” and “where” in auditory cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 97:11800–806.

[JPR]
Raymer, A. M. & Ochipa, C. (1997) Conceptual praxis. In: Apraxia: The

neuropsychology of action, ed. L. J. G. Rothi & K. M. Heilman. Psychology
Press.

[AMB]

Reiss, D. & McCowan, B. (1993) Spontaneous vocal mimicry and production by

bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus): Evidence for vocal learning. Journal
of Comparative Psychology 107:301–12.

[WTF]

Rendall, D. (2003) Acoustic correlates of caller identity and affect intensity in the
vowel-like grunt vocalizations of baboons. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 113:3390–402.

[RMS]

Rendall, D., Seyfarth, R. M., Cheney, D. L. & Owren, M. J. (1999) The meaning

and function of grunt variants in baboons. Animal Behaviour 57:583–92.
[RMS]

Perrett, D., Smith, P. A. J., Mistlin, A. J., Chitty, A. J, Head, A. S., Potter, D. D,

Ribeiro, S., Cecchi, G. A., Magnasco, M. O. & Mello, C. (1998) Toward a song

Broenniman, R., Milner, A. P. & Jeeves, M. A. (1985) Visual analysis of body
movements by neurones in the temporal cortex of the macaque monkey.
Behavior and Brain Research 16(2–3):153–70.

[DB]

Peters, A. M. (1983) Units of language acquisition. Cambridge University Press.

[rMAA, AW]

code: Evidence for a syllabic representation in the canary brain. Neuron
21:359–71.

[IMP]

Richards, D. G., Wolz, J. P. & Herman, L. M. (1984) Vocal mimicry of computer-

generated sounds and vocal labeling of objects by a bottlenosed dolphin,
Tursiops truncatus. Journal of Comparative Psychology 98:10–28.

[WTF]

Petersen, M. R., Beecher, M. D., Zoloth, S. L., Moody, D. B. & Stebbins, W. C.

Ritt, N. (2004) Selfish sounds and linguistic evolution. Cambridge University Press.

(1978) Neural lateralization of species-specific vocalizations by Japanese
macaques. Science 202:324–27.

[RMS]

[rMAA]

Rizzolatti, G. & Arbib, M. A. (1998) Language within our grasp. Trends in

Petitto, L. A. & Marentette, P. F. (1991) Babbling in the manual mode: Evidence

Neurosciences. 21(5):188–94.

[aMAA, CB, JPR]

for the ontogeny of language. Science 251:1493–96.

[BH]

Petrides, M. & Pandya, D. N. (1984) Projections to the frontal cortex from the

posterior parietal region in the rhesus monkey. Journal of Comparative
Neurology 228:105–16.

[aMAA]

Rizzolatti, G., Camarda, R., Fogassi, L., Gentilucci, M., Luppino, G. & Matelli, M.

(1988) Functional organization of inferior area 6 in the macaque monkey II.
Area F5 and the control of distal movements. Experimental Brain Research
71:491–507.

[aMAA]

Pfeiffer, J. E. (1982) The creative explosion. An inquiry into the origins of art and

Rizzolatti, G. & Craighero, L. (2004) The mirror-neuron system. Annual Review of

religion. Cornell University Press.

[HF]

Neuroscience 27:169–92.

[HT]

Pinker, S. (1995) The language instinct: How the mind creates language. Harper

Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga L., Gallese, V. & Fogassi, L. (1996a) Premotor cortex and 

Perennial.

[CB]

Ploog, D. (1988) Neurobiology and pathology of subhuman vocal communication

and human speech. In: Primate vocal communication, ed. D. Todt, P.
Goedeking & D. Symmes. Springer Verlag.

[EG]

Plumer, T. K. & Striedter, G. F. (1997) Auditory and vocalization related activity in

the vocal control system of budgerigars. Society for Neuroscience Abstracts
100:10.

[IMP]

(2000) Auditory responses in the vocal motor system of budgerigars. Journal of

Neurobiology 42:79–94.

[IMP]

Podell, K., Wisniewski, K. & Lovell, M. R. (2001) The assessment of echopraxia as
a component of executive control deficit in traumatic brain injury. Brain and
Cognition 47(1–2):349–53.

[rMAA]

Poremba, A., Malloy, M., Saunders, R. C., Carson, R. E., Herscovitch, P. &

Mishkin, M. (2004) Species-specific calls evoke asymmetric activity in the
monkey’s temporal poles. Nature 427:448–51.

[RMS]

Prell, C. G., Hauser, M. D. & Moody, D. B. (2002) Discrete or graded variation

within rhesus monkey screams? Psychophysical experiment on classification.
Animal Behaviour 63:47–62.

[RMS]

Provine, R. R. (1986) Yawning as a stereotyped action pattern and releasing

stimulus. Ethology 72:109–22.

[RRP]

(1989) Faces as releasers of contagious yawning: An approach to face detection
using normal human subjects. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society 27:211–14.
[RRP]

(1993) Laughter punctuates speech: Linguistic, social and gender contexts of

laughter. Ethology 95:291–98.

[RRP]

(1996) Laughter. American Scientist 84:38–45.
(2000) Laughter: A scientific investigation. Viking.

[RRP]

[RRP]

Prudkov, P. N. (1999a) Human evolution expanded brains to increase motivational

ability, not expertise capacity. Psycoloquy 10(012). Available at:
http://www.cogsci.soton.ac.uk/cgi/psyc/newpsy?10.012. (Online Journal).
[PNP]

the recognition of motor actions. Cognitive Brain Research 3:131–41.
[aMAA]

Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga, L., Matelli, M., Bettinardi, V., Perani, D. & Fazio, F. (1996b)

Localization of grasp representations in humans by positron emission
tomography: 1. Observation versus execution. Experimental Brain Research
111:246–52.

[aMAA]

Rizzolatti, R., Fogassi, L. & Gallese, V. (2001) Neurophysiological mechanisms

underlying the understanding and imitation of action. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience 2:661–70.

[arMAA]

Rizzolatti G. & Luppino G. (2001) The cortical motor system. Neuron 31:889–901.

[aMAA]

(2003) Grasping movements: Visuomotor transformations. In: The handbook of
brain theory and neural networks, 2nd edition, ed. M. A. Arbib, pp. 501–504.
MIT Press.

[aMAA]

Rizzolatti, G., Luppino, G. & Matelli M. (1998) The organization of the cortical

motor system: New concepts. Electroencephalography and Clinical
Neurophysiology 106:283–96.

[aMAA]

Rolls, E. T. & Arbib, M. A. (2003) Visual scene perception. In: The handbook of
brain theory and neural networks, 2nd edition, ed. M. A. Arbib. MIT Press.
[aMAA]

Romanski, L. M. & Goldman-Rakic, P. S. (2002) An auditory domain in primate

prefrontal cortex. Nature Neuroscience 5:15–16.

[CB, JPR]

Ross, E. D. (1981) The aprosodias. Functional-anatomic organization of the
affective components of language in the right hemisphere. Archives of
Neurology 38(9):561–69.

[AMB, BK]

Rothi, L. J. G., Raade, A. S. & Heilman, K. M. (1994) Localization of lesions in

limb and buccofacial apraxia. In: Localization and neuroimaging in
neuropsychology, ed. A. Kertesz. Academic Press.

[AMB]

Ruppin, E. (2002) Evolutionary autonomous agents: A neuroscience perspective.

Nature Reviews Neuroscience 3(2):132–41.

[EB]

Saunders, R. C., Fritz, J. B. & Mishkin, M. (1998) The effects of rhinal cortical

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

165

References/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

lesions on auditory short-term memory (STM) in the rhesus monkey. Society
for Neuroscience Abstracts 24:1907.

[BH]

Sutton, D. & Jürgens, U. (1988) Neural control of vocalization. In: Comparative

primate biology, vol. 4, Neurosciences. Alan R. Liss.

[EG]

Scherer, K. R. (1986) Vocal affect expression: A review and a model for future

Tager-Flusberg, H. (1997) The role of theory of mind in language acquisition:

research. Psychological Bulletin 99:143–65.

[BK]

Schubotz, R. I. & von Cramon, D. Y. (2003) Functional-anatomical concepts of

human premotor cortex: Evidence from fMRI and PET studies. NeuroImage
20 (Suppl. 1):S120–31.

[JTK]

Scott, S. K., Blank, C. C., Rosen, S. & Wise, R. J. (2000) Identification of a pathway

for intelligible speech in the left temporal lobe. Brain 123 (Pt 12):2400–406.
[JPR]

Seddoh, S. A. (2002) How discrete or independent are “affective prosody” and

“linguistic prosody”? Aphasiology 16(7):683–92.

[BK]

Seltzer, B. & Pandya, D. N. (1994) Parietal, temporal, and occipital projections to

cortex of the superior temporal sulcus in the rhesus monkey: A retrograde
tracer study. Journal of Comparative Neurology 15:445–63.

[aMAA]

Seyfarth, R. M. & Cheney, D. L. (2003a) Meaning and emotion in animal

vocalizations. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1000:32–55.

[CB]

(2003b) Signalers and receivers in animal communication. Annual Review of

Psychology 54:145–73.

[RMS]

Seyfarth, R. M., Cheney, D. L. & Marler, P. (1980) Monkey responses to three dif-

ferent alarm calls: Evidence for predator classification and semantic
communication. Science 210:801–803.

[RMS]

Shallice, T. (1988) From neuropsychology to mental structure. Cambridge

University Press.

[HF]

Contributions from the study of autism. In: Research on communication and
language disorders: Contributions to theories of language development, ed. L.
Adamson & M. A. Romski. Paul Brookes.

[HT]

Taira, M., Mine, S., Georgopoulos, A. P., Murata, A. & Sakata, H. (1990) Parietal

cortex neurons of the monkey related to the visual guidance of hand
movement. Experimental Brain Research 83:29–36.

[aMAA]

Tallerman, M. (2004) Analyzing the analytic: Problems with holistic theories of
protolanguage. Paper presented at the Fifth Biennial Conference on the
Evolution of Language, Leipzig, Germany, April 2004.

[rMAA, DB]

Talmy, L. (2000) Towards a cognitive semantics, 2 vols. MIT Press.
Théoret, H., Halligan, E., Kobayashi, M., Fregni, F., Tager-Flusberg, H. &

[aMAA]

Pascual-Leone, A. (2005) Impaired motor facilitation during action
observation in individuals with autism spectrum disorder. Current Biology
15(3):R84–85.

[HT]

Tian, B., Reser, D., Durham, A., Kustov, A. & Rauschecker, J. P. (2001) Functional
[JPR]
Tomasello, M. (1999a) The cultural origins of human cognition. Harvard University

specialization in rhesus monkey auditory cortex. Science 292:290–93.

Press.

[HF]

(1999b) The human adaptation for culture. Annual Review of Anthropology

28:509–29.

[aMAA]

Tomasello, M. & Call, J. (1997) Primate cognition. Oxford University Press.

Shaw, R. & Turvey, M. (1981) Coalitions as models of ecosystems: A realist

[aMAA]

perspective on perceptual organization. In: Perceptual organization, ed. M.
Kubovy & J. R. Pomerantz, pp. 343–415. Erlbaum.

[rMAA]

Simner, M. L. (1971) Newborn’s response to the cry of another infant.

Tonkonogy, J. & Goodglass, H. (1981) Language function, foot of the third frontal
[AMB]

gyrus, and rolandic operculum. Archives of Neurology 38:486–90.

Tononi, G. & Edelman, G. M. (1998) Consciousness and complexity. Science

Developmental Psychology 5:136–50.

[RRP]

282:1846–51.

[HF]

Skelly, M., Schinsky, L., Smith, R. W. & Fust, R. S. (1974) American Indian Sign

Trevarthen, C. (2001) The neurobiology of early communication: Intersubjective

(Amerind) as a facilitator of verbalization for the oral verbal apraxic. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Disorders 39:445–56.

[AMB]

Smith, E. E. & Jonides, J. (1998) Neuroimaging analyses of human working

memory. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences U.S.A. 95:12061–
68.

[CB]

Snowdon, C. T. (1989) Vocal communication in New World monkeys. Journal of

Human Evolution 18:611–33.

[EG]

(1990) Language capacities of nonhuman animals. Yearbook of Physical

Anthropology 33:215–43.

[RMS]

Snowdon, C. T., French, J. A. & Cleveland, J. (1986) Ontogeny of primate
vocalizations: Models from birdsong and human speech. In: Current
perspectives in primate social behavior, ed. D. Taub & F. E. King. Van
Nostrand Rheinhold.

[RMS]

Speedie, L. J., Wertman, E., Tair, J. & Heilman, K. M. (1993) Disruption of

regulations in human brain development. In: Handbook on brain and
behavior in human development, ed. A. F. Kalverboer & A. Gramsbergen,
pp. 841–82. Kluwer.

[rMAA]

Tsiotas, G., Borghi, A. & Parisi, D. (in press) Objects and affordances: An Artificial

Life simulation. Proceeding of the XVII Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society.

[DP]

Tucker, D. M., Watson, R. T. & Heilman, K. M. (1977) Affective discrimination
and evocation in patients with right parietal disease. Neurology 17:947–50.
[AMB]

Tucker, M. & Ellis, R. (1998) On the relations between seen objects and

components of potential actions. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance 24(3):830–46.

[DP]

(2004) Action priming by briefly presented objects. Acta Psychologica 116:185–

203.

[DP]

automatic speech following a right basal ganglia lesion. Neurology 43:1768–
74.

[AMB]

Ullman, M. (2004) Contributions of memory circuits to language: The declarative

procedural model. Cognition 92:231–70.

[rMAA]

Stoel-Gammon, C. & Otomo, K. (1986) Babbling development of hearing-

Umiltá, M. A., Kohler, E., Gallese, V., Fogassi, L., Fadiga, L., Keysers, C. &

impaired and normally hearing subjects. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders 51:33–41.

[BH]

Rizzolatti, G. (2001) I know what you are doing. A neurophysiological study.
Neuron 31:155–65.

[aMAA]

Stokoe, W. C. (2001) Language in hand: Why sign came before speech. Gallaudet

Ungerleider, L. G. & Mishkin, M. (1982) Two cortical visual systems. In: Analysis

University Press.

[aMAA]

Striedter, G. (1994) The vocal control pathways in budgerigars differ from those in

songbirds. Journal of Comparative Neurology 343:35–56.

[IMP]

(2004) Principles of brain evolution. Sinauer Associates.

[rMAA]

of visual behaviour, ed. D. J. Ingle, M. A. Goodale & R. J. W. Mansfield,
pp. 549–86. MIT Press.

[JPR]

Vaccari, O. & Vaccari, E. E. (1961) Pictorial Chinese-Japanese characters, 4th

edition. Charles E. Tuttle.

[aMAA]

Studdert-Kennedy, M. (2002) Mirror neurons, vocal imitation and the evolution of

Valenstein, E. & Heilman, K. M. (1979) Apraxic agraphia with neglect-induced

particulate speech. In: Mirror neurons and the evolution of brain and
language, ed. M. Stamenov & V. Gallese, pp. 207–27. John Benjamins.
[rMAA]

Studdert-Kennedy, M. G. & Lane, H. (1980) Clues from the differences between

signed and spoken languages. In: Signed and spoken language: Biological
constraints on linguistic form, ed. U. Bellugi & M. Studdert-Kennedy. Verlag
Chemie.

[PFM]

Suddendorf, T. (1999) The rise of the metamind. In: The descent of mind:

Psychological perspectives on hominid evolution, ed. M. C. Corballis & S. E.
G. Lea, pp. 218–60. Oxford University Press.

[HF]

Suddendorf, T. & Corballis, M. C. (1997) Mental time travel and the evolution of

the human mind. Genetic, Social, and General Psychology Monographs
123(2):133–67.

[HF, PNP]

paragraphia. Archives of Neurology 36:506–508.

[AMB]

Ventner A., Lord, C. & Schopler, E. (1992) A follow-up study of high-functioning

autistic children. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 33:489–507.
[HT]

Visalberghi, E. & Fragaszy, D. (2002) “Do monkeys ape?” Ten years after. In:

Imitation in animals and artifacts, ed. C. Nehaniv & K. Dautenhahn. MIT
Press

[aMAA]

Voelkl, B. & Huber, L. (2000) True imitation in marmosets? Animal Behaviour

60:195–20.

[aMAA]

Wang, X., Merzenich, M. M., Beitel, R. & Schreiner, C. E. (1995) Representation
of species-specific vocalization in the primary auditory cortex of the common
marmoset: Temporal and spectral characteristics. Journal of Neurophysiology
74:2685–706.

[RMS]

Suddendorf, T. & Whiten, A. (2001) Mental evolution and development: Evidence

Watson, R. T., Fleet, W. S., Gonzalez-Rothi, L. & Heilman, K. M. (1986) Apraxia 

for secondary representation in children, great apes, and other animals.
Psychological Bulletin 127:629–50.

[JHGW]

Supalla, T. (1986) The classifier system in American Sign Language. In: Noun
classes and categorization, vol. 7 of Typological studies in language, ed. 
C. Craig. John Benjamins.

[aMAA]

Supalla, T. & Newport, E. (1978) How many seats in a chair? The derivation 

of nouns and verbs in American sign language. In: Understanding language
through sign language research, ed. P. Siple. Academic Press.
[aMAA]

and the supplementary motor area. Archives of Neurology 43:787–92.
[AMB]

Weydemeyer, W. (1930) An unusual case of mimicry by a catbird. Condor 32:124–

25.

[WTF]

Wheeler, M. A., Stuss, D. T. & Tulving, E. (1997) Toward a theory of episodic
memory: The frontal lobes and autonoetic consciousness. Psychological
Bulletin 121(3):331–54.

[HF]

Whiten A. & Byrne, R. W. (1997) Machiavellian intelligence II.: Evaluations and

extensions. Cambridge University Press.

[JHGW]

166

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

References/Arbib: From monkey-like action recognition to human language

Whiten, A., Goodall, J., McGrew, W. C., Nishida, T., Reynolds, V., Sugiyama Y.,

(2002a) Formulaic language and the lexicon. Cambridge University Press.

Tutin, C. E. G., Wrangham, R. W. & Boesch, C. (2001) Charting cultural
variation in chimpanzees. Behaviour 138:1481–516.

[arMAA]

Whiten, A., Horner, V., Litchfield, C. & Marshall-Pescini, S. (2004) How do apes

ape? Learning and Behaviour 32:36–52.

[JHGW]

[rMAA, WTF, AW]

(2002b) Dual processing in protolanguage: Performance without competence.
In: The transition to language, ed. A. Wray, pp. 113–37. Oxford University
Press.

[AW]

Wierzbicka, A. (1992) Semantics, culture, and cognition: Universal human concepts

(2004) “Here’s one I prepared earlier”: Formulaic language learning on

in culture-specific configurations. Oxford University Press.

[HF]

(1993) A conceptual basis for cultural psychology. Ethos 21(2):205–31.

[HF]

Wildgruber, D., Ackermann, H., Klose, U., Kardatzki, B. & Grodd, W. (1996)
Functional lateralization of speech production at primary motor cortex: A
fMRI study. NeuroReport 7:2791–95.

[AMB]

Wilkins, W. K. & Wakefield, J. (1995) Brain evolution and neurolinguistic

preconditions. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 18:161–226.

[HF]

Williams, H. (1989) Multiple representations and auditory-motor interactions in

the avian song system. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 563:148–
64.

[IMP]

Williams, J. H. G., Whiten, A., Suddendorf, T. & Perrett, D. I. (2001) Imitation,

mirror neurons and autism. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 25:287–
95.

[HT, JHGW]

Wilson, S. M., Saygin, A. P., Sereno, M. I. & Iacoboni, M. (2004) Listening to

speech activates motor areas involved in speech production. Nature
Neuroscience 7(7):701–702.

[CB, JTK]

Wittgenstein, L. (1958) Philosophical investigations. Blackwell.
[rMAA]
Wolpert, D. M., Doya, K. & Kawato, M. (2003) A unifying computational

framework for motor control and social interaction. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences 358:593–602.
[rMAA]
Worden, R. (1998) The evolution of language from social intelligence. In:

Approaches to the evolution of language, ed. J. R. Hurford, M. Studdert-
Kennedy & C. Knight. Cambridge University Press.

[RMS]

television. In: The acquisition and use of formulaic sequences, ed. N. Schmitt,
pp. 249–68. John Benjamins.

[AW]

Yu, C. & Ballard, D. H. (2004) A multimodal learning interface for grounding

spoken language in sensory perceptions. ACM Transactions on Applied
Perception 1:57–80.

[CY]

Yu, C., Ballard, D. H. & Aslin, R. N. (2003) The role of embodied intention in

early lexical acquisition. In: Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, pp. 1293–98, ed. R. Alterman & D. Kirsh.
Erlbaum. A long version is submitted to Journal of Cognitive Science.
Zatorre, R. J., Bouffard, M. & Belin, P. (2004) Sensitivity to auditory object

[CY]

features in human temporal neocortex. Journal of Neuroscience 24:3637–42.
[JPR]

Zentall, T. & Akins, C. (2001) Imitation in animals: Evidence, function, and

mechanisms. In: Avian visual cognition, ed. R. G. Cook. Available online at:
http://www.pigeon.psy.tufts.edu/avc/zentall/.

[BI]

Zeshan, U. (2003) Aspects of Turk Isaret Dili (Turkish Sign Language). Sign

Language & Linguistics 6(1):43–75.

[KE]

Zoloth, S. R., Petersen, M. R., Beecher, M. D., Green, S., Marler, P., Moody, D. B.

& Stebbins, W. C. (1979) Species-specific perceptual processing of vocal
sounds by monkeys. Science 204:870–72.

[RMS]

Zuberbuhler, K. (2003) Referential signaling in nonhuman primates: Cognitive
precursors and limitations for the evolution of language. Advances in the
Study of Behavior 33:265–307.

[RMS]

Wray, A. (1998) Protolanguage as a holistic system for social interaction. Language

Zuberbuhler, K., Cheney, D. L. & Seyfarth, R. M. (1999) Conceptual semantics in

& Communication 18:47–67.

[aMAA, DB, HF, AW]

(2000) Holistic utterances in protolanguage: The link from primates to humans.
In: The evolutionary emergence of language: Social function and the origins of
linguistic form, ed. C. Knight, M. Studdert-Kennedy & J. Hurford, pp. 285–
302. Cambridge University Press.

[aMAA, DB, HF, AW]

a nonhuman primate. Journal of Comparative Psychology 113:33–42.
[RMS]

Zukow-Goldring, P. (1996) Sensitive caregivers foster the comprehension of

speech: When gestures speak louder than words. Early Development and
Parenting 5(4):195–211.

[rMAA]

BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:2

167

